DCL-20-02%20RSA-17%20Form%20-%20081420%20Corrected

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES

Date: August 13, 2020
DCL-20-02

Dear Colleagues,

The Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA) is transmitting a copy of the Vocational

Rehabilitation Financial Report (RSA-17) and instructions for completing the form for the State
Vocational Rehabilitation (VR) Services program. The Office of Management and Budget
• (OMB) has approved this form (OMB Control No. 1820-0017) through August 31, 2023.

The RSA-17 collects data on VR program activities for agencies funded under the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended by title IV of the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (WIOA). RSA uses the data to evaluate and monitor the financial and
programmatic performance of VR agencies. The RSA-17 captures:

• • Federal and non-Federal administrative expenditures for the VR program;

• • Federal and non-Federal expenditures for Services to Groups;

• • Federal and non-Federal American Job Center Infrastructure expenditures;

• • Receipt, use, and/or transfer of VR program income;

• • Financial data necessary to ensure Federal award requirements are met (e.g., those for
match, maintenance of effort, and the reservation of funds for the provision of pre-
employment transition services); and

• • Obligations and disbursements that occurred during the period of the award.

The data collected via the RSA-17 are necessary to ensure Federal requirements imposed by the
Rehabilitation Act and its implementing Federal regulations are satisfied. The attached document
shows the applicable portions of the Rehabilitation Act that necessitate the reporting of the data
collected by the RSA-17.

The RSA-17 will be effective for the VR program for new VR grant awards issued on or after
October 1, 2020 (Federal fiscal year (FFY) 2021). The RSA-17 form will replace the RSA-2 and

SF-425 submissions for these awards. The RSA-17 will collect quarterly cumulative VR
financial data on an award-by-award basis.

400 MARYLAND AVE. S.W., WASHINGTON, DC 20202-2600
www.ed.gov
The Department of Education’s mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness
by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.

---
Page 2

Forms must be submitted electronically through the RSA Management Information System. To
enter data into this form online, visit https://rsa.ed.gov. To enter data, individuals must have a
user ID. If you do not have a user ID, the procedures for obtaining one are located at:

https://rsa.ed.gov/help/technical-support

If you have any questions about completing the RSA-17, please contact the RSA Financial
Management Specialist assigned to your agency.

Sincerely,

/S/

Mark Schultz
Commissioner, Rehabilitation Services Administration
Delegated the authority to perform
the functions and duties of the Assistant Secretary
for the Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services

Attachment

---
Page 3

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION FINANCIAL REPORT (RSA-17)
A. Grant Award Information
Federal Grant Award Number 2. Federal Fiscal Year 3. Grant Period (From/To)

Recipient Organization
Basis of Accounting 6. Reporting Period 7. Final Report
Accrual End Date
☐
Cash
☐
DUNS Number 9. Recipient Account Number or Identifying Number
B. Federal Funds Amount
Total Federal Funds Awarded
Federal Cash Receipts
Federal Cash Disbursements
Federal Cash on Hand
Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures
Federal Funds Expended for the Provision of Pre-Employment Transition Services
(not including expenditures for these services incurred with program income)
Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes
Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes
Federal Share of Allowable Unliquidated Obligations
Total Federal Share
Unobligated Balance of Federal Funds
C. Federal Program Income Amount
Total Federal Program Income Received
Program Income Expended Under VR Program in Accordance with the Addition
Alternative
VR SSA Payments Transferred to the State Independent Living Services Program
VR SSA Payments Transferred to the Independent Living Services for Older
Individuals who are Blind Program
VR SSA Payments Transferred to the Client Assistance Program
VR SSA Payments Transferred to the State Supported Employment Services
Program
Unexpended Program Income
• D. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the FFY of Appropriation (1st - 4th Qtr.) Amount
Total Non-Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures (1st - 4th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share of Allowable Unliquidated Obligations (1st - 4th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes (1st – 4th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes (1st- 4th Qtr.)

• E. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the Carryover Year (5th – 8th Qtr.) Amount
Non-Federal Expenditures for Allowable Unliquidated Obligations Reported on the
4th Quarter Report, Line 29, Liquidated After the 4th Quarter (5th – 8th Qtr.)
Additional New Non-Federal Expenditures (5th – 8th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes (5th – 8th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes (5th – 8th Qtr.)
Data entry is not required. Expiration: 08/31/2023

VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION FINANCIAL REPORT (RSA-17)
A. Grant Award Information
1. Federal Grant Award Number 2. Federal Fiscal Year 3. Grant Period (From/To)
4. Recipient Organization
| 5. Basis of Accounting
Accrual
☐
Cash | 6. Reporting Period
End Date | 7. Final Report | | |
| ☐
DUNS Number | 9. Recipient Account Number or Identifying Number | | | |
B. Federal Funds Amount
10. Total Federal Funds Awarded
11. Federal Cash Receipts
12. Federal Cash Disbursements
13. Federal Cash on Hand
14. Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures
15. Federal Funds Expended for the Provision of Pre-Employment Transition Services
(not including expenditures for these services incurred with program income)
16. Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes
17. Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes
18. Federal Share of Allowable Unliquidated Obligations
19. Total Federal Share
20. Unobligated Balance of Federal Funds
C. Federal Program Income Amount
21. Total Federal Program Income Received
22. Program Income Expended Under VR Program in Accordance with the Addition
Alternative
23. VR SSA Payments Transferred to the State Independent Living Services Program
24. VR SSA Payments Transferred to the Independent Living Services for Older
Individuals who are Blind Program
25. VR SSA Payments Transferred to the Client Assistance Program
26. VR SSA Payments Transferred to the State Supported Employment Services
Program
27. Unexpended Program Income
D. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the FFY of Appropriation (1st - 4th Qtr.) Amount
28. Total Non-Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures (1st - 4th Qtr.)
29. Non-Federal Share of Allowable Unliquidated Obligations (1st - 4th Qtr.)
30. Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes (1st – 4th Qtr.)
31. Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes (1st- 4th Qtr.)
E. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the Carryover Year (5th – 8th Qtr.) Amount
32. Non-Federal Expenditures for Allowable Unliquidated Obligations Reported on the
4th Quarter Report, Line 29, Liquidated After the 4th Quarter (5th – 8th Qtr.)
33. Additional New Non-Federal Expenditures (5th – 8th Qtr.)
34. Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes (5th – 8th Qtr.)
35. Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes (5th – 8th Qtr.)

---
Page 4

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

F. Indirect Expenses
Federal Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs:
• a. Type b. Rate c. Period d. Period To e. Base f. Amount g. Federal
From Charged Share

• h. Totals
G. Federal and Non-Federal Expenditures
(Include Program Income — Do NOT Include Unliquidated Obligations) Amount
Administrative Expenditures
Expenditures Incurred for the Provision of Pre-employment Transition Services by
Agency Staff Only
• a. Required and Coordination Pre-employment Transition Services Provided by Agency
Staff Only
• b. Authorized Pre-employment Transition Services Provided by Agency Staff Only
Services to Groups
• a. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of CRP

• b. Telecommunication Systems
• c. Special Services to Provide Nonvisual Access to Information
• d. Technical Assistance to Businesses
• e. Business Enterprise Program (Randolph-Sheppard Program)
• f. Transition Consultation and Technical Assistance
• g. Transition Services to Youth and Students
• h. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of Assistive Technology
• i. Support for Advanced Training
American Job Center Infrastructure Expenditures
Total Innovation and Expansion (I&E) Expenditures
• a. I&E Expenditures Supporting State Rehabilitation Council Resource Plan

• b. I&E Expenditures Supporting Statewide Independent Living Council Resource Plan
H. Remarks
Remarks

• I. Certification: By signing this report, I certify that it is true, complete, and accurate to the best
of my knowledge. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or fraudulent information may subject
me to criminal, civil, or administrative penalties. (U.S. Code, Title 18, Section 1001)
Name and Title of
Authorized Certifying Official
Telephone
(Area code, number, and extension)
Email Address
Signature of Authorized Certifying
Official
Date Report Submitted
(Month, day, year)
Data entry is not required. Expiration: 08/31/2023

F. Indirect Expenses
36. Federal Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs:
| a. Type | | b. Rate | | c. Period
From | | | | d. Period To | | e. Base | | f. Amount
Charged | g. Federal
Share |
h. Totals
| G. Federal and Non-Federal Expenditures
(Include Program Income — Do NOT Include Unliquidated Obligations) | | | | | | | | | | | | | Amount |
37. Administrative Expenditures
38. Expenditures Incurred for the Provision of Pre-employment Transition Services by
Agency Staff Only
| a. Required and Coordination Pre-employment Transition Services Provided by Agency
Staff Only | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
b. Authorized Pre-employment Transition Services Provided by Agency Staff Only
39. Services to Groups
a. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of CRP
b. Telecommunication Systems
c. Special Services to Provide Nonvisual Access to Information
d. Technical Assistance to Businesses
e. Business Enterprise Program (Randolph-Sheppard Program)
f. Transition Consultation and Technical Assistance
g. Transition Services to Youth and Students
h. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of Assistive Technology
i. Support for Advanced Training
40. American Job Center Infrastructure Expenditures
41. Total Innovation and Expansion (I&E) Expenditures
a. I&E Expenditures Supporting State Rehabilitation Council Resource Plan
b. I&E Expenditures Supporting Statewide Independent Living Council Resource Plan
H. Remarks
Remarks
I. Certification: By signing this report, I certify that it is true, complete, and accurate to the best
of my knowledge. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or fraudulent information may subject
me to criminal, civil, or administrative penalties. (U.S. Code, Title 18, Section 1001)
42. Name and Title of
Authorized Certifying Official
43. Telephone
(Area code, number, and extension)
44. Email Address
45. Signature of Authorized Certifying
Official
46. Date Report Submitted
(Month, day, year)

---
Page 5

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Paperwork Burden Statement

According to the Paperwork Reduction Act, as amended, no persons are required to respond to a
collection of information unless it displays a valid Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
Control Number. The valid OMB control number for this information collection is 0820-0017.
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 32.67 hours per
response, including time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering
and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The obligation to respond to this collection is required to obtain or retain a benefit. If you have
comments or concerns regarding the status of your individual submission of this form, please
contact David Steele at (202) 245-6520.

---
Page 6

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

I. General Information

The RSA-17 is a cumulative report that captures the financial status of a grant award at a specific
point in time. Grantees use the form to report cumulative expenses that are calculated by adding
all expenses from the beginning of the period of performance for the award (i.e., beginning of the
reporting period) to the end of the reporting period specified on the RSA-17.

Agencies are required to maintain supporting documentation to substantiate the financial data
reported on the RSA-17, as is true for any financial reports submitted by the grantee (2 C.F.R. §
200.302(a)). Additionally, the agency’s financial and accounting systems must be sufficient to
permit the preparation of reports required by general and program-specific terms and conditions;
and the tracing of funds to a level of expenditures adequate to establish that such funds have
been used according to the Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the
Federal award (Id.).

The RSA-17 will be available online the next working day after the end date of the reporting
period. A grantee is required to submit an RSA-17 report quarterly for every grant award’s
period of performance, regardless of whether expenses were incurred during any particular

quarterly reporting period. If expenses were not incurred during a particular quarter of the period
of performance, the grantee should report a zero for the appropriate line items.

Forms must be submitted electronically through the RSA Management Information System
(RSAMIS). In addition, grantees should maintain a hardcopy of the report, signed by the
certifying official, for verification purposes.

To enter data into this form online, visit https://rsa.ed.gov. To enter data, individuals must have a
user ID. If you do not have a user ID, the procedures for obtaining one are located at:

https://rsa.ed.gov/help/technical-support

Agencies are responsible for having internal controls necessary to ensure RSA-17 data are
accurate and reliable upon submission to RSA. Agencies may request, through the RSAMIS, that
an RSA-17 report be opened for revision. The RSA Financial Management Specialist assigned to
the agency will review the request and, if necessary, place the form in an edit status to permit the
grantee to make changes. It is particularly important that an agency revise its 4th quarter RSA-17
report if any accounting adjustments made after the report has been submitted change the
amounts reported as of the end of the 4th quarter reporting period. For example, sometimes
agencies may make accounting adjustments using journal vouchers to reassign expenditures,
already reported in a prior period, to another funding source (e.g., Federal or State). These
adjustments after the expenditure has been reported would require revisions to the previously
submitted financial reports based upon when the obligation or expenditure was incurred.

If any of the information in pre-populated or calculated data fields is inaccurate, please contact
the RSA Financial Management Specialist assigned to your agency.

1

---
Page 7

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Questions regarding the RSA-17 report or instructions may be sent to RSAfiscal@ed.gov or
mailed to:

U.S. Department of Education
Rehabilitation Services Administration
Attn: David Steele
Potomac Center Plaza
400 Maryland Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20202-2800

II. Definitions and Technical Assistance

• A. Allowable Cost — A cost incurred by a grantee that is (1) reasonable and necessary for
the performance of the award; (2) allocable; (3) in conformance with any limitations or
exclusions set forth in the Uniform Guidance; (4) consistent with regulations, policies,
and procedures of the grantee for both Federally-supported and other activities of the

organization; (5) accorded consistent treatment as a direct or indirect cost; (6)
determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; and (7) not
included as a cost in any other Federally-supported award (unless specifically
authorized by statute) (2 C.F.R. § 200.403). Only allowable VR program costs are to be
reported on the RSA-17.

• B. Applicable Credits — Applicable credits are those receipts or reduction-of-expenditure
type transactions that offset or reduce expense items allocable to the Federal award as
direct or indirect (i.e., facilities and administration (F&A)) costs. Examples of such
transactions include purchase discounts, rebates or allowances, recoveries or
indemnities on losses, insurance refunds or rebates, and adjustments of overpayments
or erroneous charges. To the extent that such credits accruing to or received by the non-
Federal entity relate to allowable costs, they must be credited to the Federal award
either as a cost reduction or a cash refund (2 C.F.R. § 200.406(a)). The applicable credit
must be applied to the Federal fiscal year (FFY) from which the initial cost expenditure
was made.

If the initial expense was paid with non-Federal funds, the applicable credit should be
applied to the fund from which the initial expenditure was made (in other words, non-
Federal funds). For expenses funded by both non-Federal and Federal funds, the credit
should be applied to each funding source in proportion to the initial amounts paid.

• C. Carryover — The unobligated balance of authorized Federal funds that a grantee may

obligate and expend in a subsequent FFY provided the grantee met the matching
requirements by the end of the FFY of appropriation (Section 19 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973, as amended (Rehabilitation Act) and 34 C.F.R. § 361.64).

Section 19(a)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act permits grantees to carry over Federal funds
for obligation and expenditure in the subsequent FFY provided certain conditions are
met, as described further below. This means that grantees may carry over the
unobligated balance of Federal VR funds for one FFY beyond the FFY of appropriation

2

---
Page 8

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

so long as the conditions of Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act were satisfied. For
example, the FFY of appropriation for FFY 2021 awards begin on October 1, 2020 and
will end on September 30, 2021. The carryover period for FFY 2021 awards will start
on October 1, 2021 and will end on September 30, 2022.

To carry over Federal funds into the subsequent FFY for obligation and liquidation,
grantees must:

Have an unobligated balance of Federal funds at the end of the FFY of
appropriation; and

Have satisfied the applicable non-Federal share requirement by the end of the
FFY of appropriation for:

• a. the Federal funds obligated or liquidated during the FFY of appropriation;
and

• b. the unobligated balance of Federal funds to be carried over to the
subsequent FFY.

D. Disbursement — the act of paying out money.

• E. Expenditures — charges made by a non-Federal entity to a project or program for
which a Federal award was received. In accordance with 2 C.F.R. § 200.34:

• (a) The charges may be reported on a cash or accrual basis if the methodology is
disclosed and is consistently applied.

• (b) For reports prepared on a cash basis, expenditures are the sum of:

• (1) Cash disbursements for direct charges for property and services;

• (2) The amount of indirect expense charged;

• (3) The value of third-party in-kind contributions applied; and

• (4) The amount of cash advance payments and payments made to subrecipients.

• (c) For reports prepared on an accrual basis, expenditures are the sum of:

• (1) Cash disbursements for direct charges for property and services;

• (2) The amount of indirect expense incurred;

• (3) The value of third-party in-kind contributions applied; and

3

(a) The charges may be reported on a cash or accrual basis if the methodology is
disclosed and is consistently applied.
(b) For reports prepared on a cash basis, expenditures are the sum of:

(1) Cash disbursements for direct charges for property and services;
(2) The amount of indirect expense charged;
(3) The value of third-party in-kind contributions applied; and
(4) The amount of cash advance payments and payments made to subrecipients.

(1) Cash disbursements for direct charges for property and services;
(2) The amount of indirect expense incurred;
(3) The value of third-party in-kind contributions applied; and

---
Page 9

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

• (4) The net increase or decrease in the amounts owed by the non-Federal entity
for:

• (i) Goods and other property received;

• (ii) Services performed by employees, contractors, subrecipients, and
other payees; and

• (iii) Programs for which no current services or performance are required
such as annuities, insurance claims, or other benefit payments.

Note: References to subrecipients in the definition above are not applicable to the VR
program since there is no authority under the Rehabilitation Act or its
implementing regulations for subawarding, also known as subgranting
(34 C.F.R. § 76.50). Additionally, third-party in-kind contributions are not an
allowable source of non-Federal share under the VR program and, therefore,
should not be reported as non-Federal expenditures (34 C.F.R. § 361.60(b)(2)).

For financial reports prepared on a cash basis, expenditures are the sum of actual cash
disbursements for direct charges for goods and services and the amount of indirect
expense charged.

For financial reports prepared on an accrual basis, expenditures are the sum of actual
cash disbursements for direct charges for goods and services, the amount of indirect
expense incurred, and the net increase (or decrease) in the amounts owed by the grantee
for goods and other property received, for services performed by employees, and

contractors.

• F. Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) of Appropriation — The FFY of appropriation is the FFY
for which Congress appropriated funds to the U.S. Department of Education
• (Department) from which the Department awards program grants, specifically the
period from October 1 through September 30. For example, the FFY 2020 State
Vocational Rehabilitation Services (VR) grants were made from the 2020 FFY of
appropriation, which covers the period of October 1, 2019 through September 30, 2020.

• G. Liquidation — The issuance of payment for an obligation (see 2 C.F.R. § 200.97).

• H. Obligations — When used in connection with a non-Federal entity’s utilization of funds
under a Federal award, obligations are orders placed for property and services,
contracts and subawards made, and similar transactions during a given period that
require payment by the non-Federal entity during the same or a future period
(2 C.F.R. § 200.71). There is no authority for subawards, as defined in 2 C.F.R. §
200.92, under the VR program. Additionally, the future period in which obligations
may be liquidated is limited by Federal requirements and the terms and conditions
applicable to the award.

Education Department General Administrative Regulations (EDGAR) at
34 C.F.R. § 76.707 provide additional guidance regarding when obligations are made.

4

(4) The net increase or decrease in the amounts owed by the non-Federal entity
for:

(i) Goods and other property received;
(ii) Services performed by employees, contractors, subrecipients, and
other payees; and
(iii) Programs for which no current services or performance are required
such as annuities, insurance claims, or other benefit payments.

---
Page 10

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

For example, travel is considered obligated when the travel is taken, and personnel
expenditures for State agency employees are considered obligated when the employee
performs the services. In determining when an obligation is made, agencies must also
follow their State laws, regulations, and policies and procedures, as applicable.

If the grantee has not met the requirements of Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act to
carry over Federal funds for obligation and expenditure in the subsequent fiscal year,
the grantee must incur all obligations, for which it has provided sufficient match funds,
by the end of the FFY of appropriation (i.e., September 30). In this circumstance, the
period of performance and the FFY of appropriation are the same.

If the grantee has met the carryover requirements by the end of the FFY of
appropriation, the period of performance will be extended to include the carryover
period (subsequent FFY). This will enable the grantee to incur new obligations against
Federal award funds during the carryover period, as indicated by the revised period of
performance on the Grant Award Notification (GAN). In other words, in this
circumstance, the period of performance covers two FFYs – the FFY of appropriation

plus the carryover year.

• I. Period of Performance — The time during which the non-Federal entity (grantee) may
incur new obligations to carry out the work authorized under the Federal award
(2 C.F.R. § 200.77). The Department, as the Federal awarding agency, must include
start and end dates of the period of performance in the Federal award. For purposes of
the Department’s GANs, the period of performance is referred to as the Federal
Funding Period (Box 6 of the GAN).

• J. Program Income — Program income means gross income received by the grantee that
is directly generated by an allowable activity supported under the VR program or
earned as a result of the Federal award during the period of performance as defined in
2 C.F.R. § 200.80 (34 C.F.R. § 361.63). Program income cannot be used to meet the
non-Federal share requirement (34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(4)). Sources of program income
include, but are not limited to:

• • Payments from the Social Security Administration (SSA) for assisting SSA
beneficiaries and recipients to achieve employment outcomes, including the
Cost Reimbursement and Ticket programs;

• • Payments received from workers’ compensation funds; payments received from
insurers, consumers, or others for services to defray part or all of the costs of
services provided to particular individuals; and

• • Income generated by a State-operated community rehabilitation program for

activities authorized under this part (34 C.F.R. § 361.63(b)).

Refunds and rebates are not program income (2 C.F.R. § 200.80).

5

---
Page 11

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

In accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(3)(ii), “to the extent available, the non-
Federal entity must disburse funds available from program income (including
repayments to a revolving fund), rebates, refunds, contract settlements, audit
recoveries, and interest earned on such funds before requesting additional cash
payments.” Program income received in the VR program and transferred to an
allowable program is considered disbursed for purposes of the VR program.

• K. Reporting Period — The time period for which the grantee reports financial
information on any given report. For example, for purposes of the 4th quarter report, the
reporting period covers the period from October 1 through September 30.

• L. Unliquidated Obligations — For financial reports prepared on a cash basis,
unliquidated obligations are obligations incurred by the non-Federal entity that have not
been paid (in other words, liquidated). For reports prepared on an accrual expenditure
basis, these are obligations incurred by the non-Federal entity for which an expenditure
has not been recorded (2 C.F.R. § 200.97).

• M. Unobligated Balance — The portion of Federal funds awarded by the Rehabilitation
Services Administration (RSA) that has not been obligated by the grantee and is

determined by deducting the cumulative obligations from the Federal funds awarded
(2 C.F.R. § 200.98).

III. Form Instructions

A. Grant Award Information

Federal Grant Award Number:

• • Data entry is not required.

The grantee’s grant award number listed in Box 2 of the GAN is the default entry.
The Uniform Guidance refers to the grant award number as the Federal Award
Identification Number (FAIN).

Federal Fiscal Year:

• • Data entry is not required.

The FFY of appropriation as listed in Box 2 of the GAN is the default entry.

Grant Period (From/To):

• • Data entry is not required.

The Federal Funding Period in Box 6 of the GAN is the default entry. This data
element represents the period for which the funds were awarded
(34 C.F.R. § 77.1(c)). The Uniform Guidance uses the term “period of
performance” rather than “grant period.” Period of performance is defined in

6

---
Page 12

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

2 C.F.R. § 200.77 in a manner like the EDGAR definition of “grant period”. A
grantee may neither obligate nor pay expenditures for costs incurred prior to the
start of the period of performance. For example, the cost for VR services provided
to a consumer prior to the start of the period of performance for a grant award
may not be charged to that grant award. Rather, those obligations must be charged
to the prior grant award. Additionally, a grantee may not obligate award funds
after the end of the period of performance for a grant award.

During the FFY of appropriation, the Federal Funding Period listed in Box 6 of
the GAN will be from October 1 to September 30 of that FFY. This represents the
one-year period for which the award is made and in which the grantee may incur
new obligations against the award. Section 19(a)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act
permits grantees to carry over Federal funds for obligation and expenditure in the
subsequent FFY provided certain conditions are met, as described further below.
This means that grantees may carry over the unobligated balance of Federal funds

for one FFY beyond the FFY of appropriation so long as the conditions of Section
19 of the Rehabilitation Act were satisfied. For example, the FFY of appropriation
for FFY 2018 awards began on October 1, 2017 and ended on September 30,
The carryover period for FFY 2018 awards started on October 1, 2018 and
ended on September 30, 2019. To carry over Federal funds into the subsequent
FFY for obligation and liquidation, grantees must:

• a. Have an unobligated balance of Federal funds at the end of the FFY of
appropriation (i.e., on September 30, 2018); and

• b. Have satisfied the applicable non-Federal share requirement by the end of the
FFY of appropriation (i.e., FFY 2018) for:

• 1. the Federal funds obligated or liquidated during the FFY of appropriation;
and

• 2. the unobligated balance of Federal funds to be carried over to the
subsequent FFY.

Upon submission of the grantee’s 4th quarter RSA-17 (which is for the reporting
period ending September 30 of the FFY of appropriation), an RSA Financial
Management Specialist will review the grantee’s report to determine whether the
grantee met the requirements necessary to carry over funds for obligation and
liquidation in the subsequent FFY. If the grantee met the requirements of Section
19 of the Rehabilitation Act to carry over funds, RSA will process an
administrative change to the current GAN extending the period of performance to
include the carryover period. Upon completion of RSA’s administrative action,

the grantee will receive a notice of a revised GAN with the revised period of
performance that includes the carryover period.

Unless the Department authorizes an extension for the carryover period consistent
with the requirements of Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act, a non-Federal

7

---
Page 13

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

entity must liquidate all obligations incurred under the Federal award not later
than 90 calendar days after the end date of the period of performance, as specified
on the GAN (2 C.F.R. § 200.343(b)).

Recipient Organization:

• • Data entry is not required.

The organization’s name and address listed in Box 1 of the GAN is the default
entry.

Basis of Accounting:

Specify whether the grantee used a cash or accrual basis for recording Federal and
non-Federal grant award transactions that form the basis for the financial data
submitted on the RSA-17.

For cash basis accounting, expenses are recorded when they are paid. The
transaction remains at the obligation stage until the liability is eliminated by the
disbursement of cash (in other words, the liquidation of the obligation).

Accrued expenditures are recorded when goods or services are received,
regardless of when cash is received or paid. The accrual method of accounting
elevates an obligation to an expenditure once the liability to pay has been created,
as opposed to when the expenditure is actually paid.

A grantee must report using either a cash or accrual basis of accounting.
However, if a grantee changes from one basis of accounting to another, the
grantee must inform RSA of the change. To ensure grantees are not utilizing
separate bases of accounting for reports covering the same period of performance,

changes to an agency’s basis of accounting should coincide with the end of the
period of performance for the grant award, thereby ensuring consistency for the
entire period of performance.

Reporting Period End Date:

• • Data entry is not required.

The default reporting period end date corresponds with the end of the required
quarterly reporting period. The period covered is always the beginning date of the
grant through the end of the reporting period. Therefore, the RSA-17 collects
cumulative data for the period of performance. An example is included in the
table below:

8

---
Page 14

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Reporting Period
Reporting Period – FFY 2021 Award End Date Quarter
October 1, 2020 – December 31, 2020 December 31, 2020 1
January 1, 2021 – March 31, 2021 March 31, 2021 2
April 1, 2021 – June 30, 2021 June 30, 2021 3
July 1, 2021 – September 30, 2021 September 30, 2021 4

October 1, 2021 – December 31, 2021 December 30, 2021 5
January 1, 2022 – March 31, 2022 March 31, 2022 6
April 1, 2022 – June 30, 2022 June 30, 2022 7
July 1, 2022 – September 30, 2022 September 30, 2022 8

These reports are to be used only if the grantee has met the requirements of
Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act necessary to carry over Federal funds for
obligation and expenditure in the succeeding FFY.

The RSA-17 reports must be submitted:

• • 30 calendar days after the end of the reporting period if the report is not the
final report; and

• • 90 calendar days after the end of the reporting period if the report is the final
report (2 C.F.R. § 200.328(b)(1)).

If RSA has approved a late liquidation request, the final RSA-17 report will be
due 90 days after the end date of the approved liquidation period.

Final Report:

Check the Final Report box if the report being submitted is the grantee’s final
report for the period of performance. The grantee submits the final RSA-17 report

for the reporting period in which the Reporting Period End Date (line 6) is the
same as the end of the period of performance.

Please refer to the example table in the instructions for line 6 above.

• • For a grantee who has obligated all its FFY 2021 Federal funds by September
30, 2021, or has not met the requirements to carry over such funds, the
Reporting Period End Date and the end of the period of performance would
both occur on September 30, 2021. In this case, the 4th quarter report for the
period ending September 30, 2021, would be the final report.

• • For a grantee who has met the carry over requirements for the FFY 2021 grant
award and RSA has extended the period of performance for that award, the
Reporting Period End Date and the end of the period of performance would
both occur on September 30, 2022. In this case, the FFY 2021 8th quarter
report for the period ending September 30, 2022, would be the final report and

9

Reporting Period – FFY 2021 Award Reporting Period Quarter
End Date
October 1, 2020 – December 31, 2020 December 31, 2020 1
January 1, 2021 – March 31, 2021 March 31, 2021 2
April 1, 2021 – June 30, 2021 June 30, 2021 3
July 1, 2021 – September 30, 2021 September 30, 2021 4
October 1, 2021 – December 31, 2021 December 30, 2021 5
January 1, 2022 – March 31, 2022 March 31, 2022 6
April 1, 2022 – June 30, 2022 June 30, 2022 7
*July 1, 2022 – September 30, 2022 September 30, 2022 8

---
Page 15

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

would be due December 30, 2022 - 90 days after the end of the period of
performance for the FFY 2021 grant award (including the carryover period).

Also see the definitions of “Obligations” and “Period of Performance” in the
definitions section.

DUNS Number:

• • Data entry is not required.

The Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) number is a unique nine-
character number that identifies the grantee’s organization (http://www.dnb.com).
The DUNS number associated with the Federal Grant Award Number, line 1, in
the Department’s Grant Management System (G5) is the default entry. This is the
DUNS number listed in Box 8 of the GAN. The DUNS number must be active
and currently registered with the System for Award Management (SAM)
(https://www.sam.gov). The DUNS and SAM systems are not managed by the
Department.

Recipient Account Number or Identifying Number:

• • This data element is optional.

• • Data entry is limited to 30 characters.

Enter an account number or other identifying number, if any, assigned by the
grantee to the award. This number, if assigned by the grantee, is for the grantee’s

own administrative use only and is not required by the Department or RSA.

B. Federal Funds
Total Federal Funds Awarded:

• • Data entry is not required.

This data element represents the total amount of Federal funds awarded by the
Department to the grantee for the specific FFY as of the end of the reporting
period. The amount listed may change due to award adjustments that could reflect
funds awarded by continuing resolutions, reductions for maintenance of effort
shortfalls required by statute, grantee-requested inter-agency transfers or
deobligations, and/or the reallotment or relinquishment of Federal funds.

Federal Cash Receipts:

Enter the cumulative amount of Federal grant funds that the grantee has drawn
down and received from the amount awarded as listed above on line 10, Total
Federal Funds Awarded, per G5. This amount (Federal cash receipts) is obtained

10

---
Page 16

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

by running a G5 External Award Activity Report (https://www.g5.gov) using date
parameters.

• • The date parameters entered in G5 will be the start date of the award and the
reporting period end date.

• • For final reports, the date parameters entered in G5 will be the start date of the
award and the date award funds were liquidated. Because an agency may draw
down funds during the liquidation period or upon receipt of an approved late
liquidation request, the end date of the G5 External Award Activity Report
may be past the end of the period of performance of the award. This does not
change the reporting period end date.

Grantees may want to maintain copies of the G5 External Award Activity Reports
as supporting documentation that verifies the accuracy of the amount reported.
Grantees should not include requests for drawdowns that were not received during
the reporting period.

Federal Cash Disbursements:

Enter the cumulative amount of actual disbursements made by the grantee from
the Federal VR funds drawn down and received during the reporting period from

line 11, Federal Cash Receipts. Disbursements are the sum of actual cash
expenditures made for direct charges for goods and services, the amount of
indirect expenses charged to the award, and the amount of payments made to
contractors/vendors.

Federal Cash on Hand (line 11 minus line 12):

• • Data entry is not required.

Because fiscal data elements from the SF-425 have been incorporated into this
revised RSA-17, VR agencies will no longer need to submit SF-425s for the VR
program after submission of the final SF-425 for FFY 2021. However, it is
essential that we maintain consistency between data elements previously collected
through the SF-425 and now through this revised RSA-17. In order to ensure
consistency with OMB’s instructions for SF-425s which this data element
mirrors, if more than three business days of cash are on hand, grantees must
provide an explanation on line 40, Remarks, as to why the drawdown was made
prematurely or other reasons for the excess cash. Grantees must minimize the
time elapsing between drawdown of Federal funds and disbursement by the
grantee in accordance with Cash Management Improvement Act (CMIA)
requirements and Department guidance.

Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures:

Enter the total amount of allowable expenditures incurred with Federal VR funds
(also known as Federal expenditures). Do not include expenditures incurred with

11

---
Page 17

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

program income (e.g., program income received as SSA reimbursements for VR
services provided to SSA recipients and beneficiaries) received by the grantee on
this line. Such program income expenditures will be reported in Section C,
Federal Program Income.

• • For reports prepared on a cash basis, the agency should report Federal fund
expenditures as the sum of cash disbursements for direct charges for goods
and services, the amount of indirect expenses charged, and the amount of
payments made to contractors/vendors.

• • For reports prepared on an accrual basis, grantees should report Federal fund
expenditures as the sum of cash disbursements for direct charges for goods
and services, the amount of indirect expenses incurred, the amount of
payments made to contractors/vendors, and the increase or decrease in the
amounts owed by the recipient for goods received and services performed by

employees, contractors/vendors, and other payees.

Grantees must include the total of all allowable Federal VR fund expenditures
incurred, as reported on lines 15, 16 and 17. For example, grantees must report
the amount expended on pre-employment transition services (which is reported on
line 14 as part of the total of Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures) separately
in line 15, Federal Funds Expended for the Provision of Pre-Employment
Transition Services.

Federal Funds Expended for the Provision of Pre-Employment Transition
Services (not including expenditures for these services incurred with program
income):

Enter the total amount of allowable Federal expenditures, included in line 14,
Federal Share of Expenditures, for the provision of pre-employment transition
services to students with disabilities who are potentially eligible or eligible for the
VR program. Include all Federal expenditures for pre-employment transition
services whether provided by agency staff or purchased. Only include Federal VR
funds that were expended for pre-employment transition services activities
described in Section 113 of the Rehabilitation Act. Do not include any Federal
unliquidated obligations which are reported separately on line 18, Federal Share
of Allowable Unliquidated Obligations.

Each State must reserve and expend at least 15 percent of its Federal VR
allotment received under Section 110 of the Rehabilitation Act for the provision

of pre-employment transition services to students with disabilities under Section
113 of the Rehabilitation Act (Section 110(d)(1)).

It is important to note that the reservation and expenditure of funds requirement
for the provision of pre-employment transition services is a State requirement, not
an agency-specific requirement. Therefore, if one VR agency in a State in which
there are two such agencies reserves and expends at least 15 percent of the State’s

12

---
Page 18

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

VR allotment on the provision of pre-employment transition services, the State
will have satisfied the requirement even if the other agency reserved and
expended no such funds. It is essential that both VR agencies in a State coordinate
with each other to ensure State compliance with this requirement.

RSA will evaluate a State’s compliance with the requirements of Sections
110(d)(1) and 113(a) of the Rehabilitation Act by determining, based on a State’s
matched funds, whether a State reserved and expended at least 15 percent of the
State’s 4th quarter grant award amount or at least 15 percent of the amount of
Federal funds that it had matched by the end of the FFY of appropriation,
whichever is less.

Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes:

Enter the Federal share of allowable expenditures incurred for the establishment
of facilities for Community Rehabilitation Program (CRP) purposes, which was
also included in the total amount of Federal expenditures reported on line 14,
Federal Share of Expenditures. Include only those Federal expenditures on line 16
for activities that would meet the definition of “establishment of a facility for a

public or nonprofit community rehabilitation program” at
34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(17). Do not include expenditures for staffing or other costs
associated with establishment projects, such as those additional costs included in
the definition of “establishment, development, or improvement of a public or
nonprofit community rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16). If no
funds were used for this purpose during the reporting period, enter zero on this
line.

Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes:

Enter the Federal share of allowable expenditures incurred for the construction of
facilities for CRP purposes, which was also included on line 14, Federal Share of
Expenditures. Only include those expenditures, paid with Federal funds, for
activities that would meet the definition of “construction of a facility for a public
or nonprofit community rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(10). Do
not include expenditures for staffing or other costs associated with establishment
projects, such as those additional costs included in the definition of
“establishment, development, or improvement of a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16). If no funds were used for this
purpose during the reporting period, enter zero on this line.

Federal Share of Unliquidated Obligations:

Enter the Federal portion of allowable unliquidated obligations incurred by the
grantee. Unliquidated obligations include orders placed for property and services,
contracts, and similar transactions during a given period that require payment by

the grantee but have not yet been paid or charged to the VR grant award. These
include direct and indirect obligations for goods and services incurred by the

13

---
Page 19

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

grantee, as well as amounts due to contractors/vendors. When submitting a final
RSA-17 report, this data element should be zero because all obligations must be
liquidated prior to the submission of the final financial reports and grant closure.

Do not include on line 18:

• • expenditures reported on line 12, Federal Cash Disbursements;

• • expenditures reported on line 14, Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures;
and

• • future fund commitments for which an obligation or expense has not been
incurred in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 76.707.

Grantees have 90 days from the end of the period of performance to liquidate
Federal obligations (2 C.F.R. § 200.343(b)). If grantees are unable to liquidate all
obligations within the liquidation period, 90 days after the period of performance
ends, grantees must submit a late liquidation request in accordance with the
Department’s guidance. If approved, the grantee must liquidate the approved
obligations and submit the final report within 90 days after the approved late
liquidation extension date.

Total Federal Share (sum of lines 14 and 18):

• • Data entry is not required.

Unobligated Balance of Federal Funds (line10 minus line 19):
• • Data entry is not required. This data element is calculated automatically.

For the final report, this figure represents the amount of Federal VR funds
awarded that the grantee did not obligate or draw down.

C. Federal Program Income

Total Federal Program Income Received:

Enter the total amount of program income received by the grantee under the VR
program as of the end of the reporting period. All program income received by the
VR program is to be reported as Federal program income earned. This means
that grantees must report, and use, program income earned under the VR
program as an addition to the Federal grant funds received under the VR
program (34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(3)(i)). In other words, grantees may not use
program income to reduce the amount of the Federal VR award.

Program income is considered received in the FFY in which the grantee receives
the funds (34 C.F.R. § 361.63 and 2 C.F.R. § 200.80). Therefore, the amount
reported should not change after the grantee submits its 4th quarter report for the

14

---
Page 20

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

FFY of appropriation in which the program income is received. Any program
income received during the subsequent FFY, even if the agency is operating under
a carryover year from the prior FFY’s grant award, must be reported on the RSA-
17 for the next FFY’s grant award.

While the program income received by the VR grantee from the Social Security
Administration (SSA) is entered on line 21, the expenditure of the program
income is reported below on lines 22 through 26 as appropriate. For example, if
the VR program receives $100,000 in SSA payments and expends those funds in
the VR program, the VR grantee must include the $100,000 on line 21 and then
report the expenditure of those on line 22.

A VR grantee may choose to transfer SSA payments received by the VR program
to certain formula grant programs funded under the Rehabilitation Act, as
permitted by Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2).
The authority to transfer program income received from SSA in accordance with
Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2) is unique only

to program income received from SSA. There is no legal authority for the VR
agency to transfer other forms of program income earned under the VR program
to another program for that program’s use. Each program receiving SSA
payments for its use must report the funds as program income received for that
program.

For example, if the VR program receives $100,000 in SSA payments, but
transfers the entire amount to the Independent Living for Older Individuals who
are Blind (OIB) program, the VR program must report the receipt of the $100,000
on line 21 and the expenditure of those funds under line 24 below. In so doing, the
VR program would report that the funds were “expended” by reporting the
transfer on line 24, VR SSA Payments Transferred to the Independent Living
Services for Older Individuals who are Blind Program. In addition, in this
example, the OIB program would report the program income on its SF-425 line
10l as received, report the program income as transferred from the VR program in
the Remarks section on line 12, Remarks, on its own SF-425.

Program income from SSA payments transferred to other eligible programs is
restricted to the grant award year that corresponds to the FFY of appropriation in
which it was received in the VR program. For example, SSA payments received
in the VR program in FFY 2021 may be transferred to the OIB program for

expenditures and reporting purposes for its FFY 2021 OIB award. This means the
transfer may occur during the FFY 2021 grant year or, in rare circumstances and
when applicable, during the FFY 2021 carryover year of the OIB grant award,
which occurs in FFY 2022. In the rare event that the program income is expended
during the FFY 2021 carryover year (which occurs in FFY 2022), all program
income information must be reported as occurring during the FFY 2021 period of
performance, not the FFY 2022 grant award’s period of performance.

15

---
Page 21

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Program Income Expended Under the VR Program in Accordance with the
Addition Alternative:

Enter the amount of program income reported on line 21, Total Federal Program
Income Received, that was expended to supplement the Federal share of the total
expenditures of the VR program (in other words, in addition to the Federal VR
expenditures incurred). The amount reported represents actual disbursements
under the VR program. The expenditure of all program income funds must meet
the same standards of allowability, reasonableness, and allocability
(2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through 200.405) that are applicable to Federal funds
(Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(3), and
2 C.F.R. §§ 200.307(e)(2)).

VR SSA Payments Transferred to the State Independent Living Services (SILS)
Program:

Enter the amount of SSA program income reported on line 21, Total Program
Income Received under the VR program, but transferred from the VR program to
the SILS program, as permitted by Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and

34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2). The SILS program should consult with the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services regarding how transferred program
income received should be reported for its program on its financial reports.

VR SSA Payments Transferred to the Independent Living Services for Older
Individuals Who are Blind (OIB) Program:

Enter the amount of SSA program income reported on line 21, Total Program
Income Received under the VR program, but transferred by the VR program to
the OIB program, as permitted by Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2). This amount must also be reported as program income
earned on the corresponding SF-425 submitted by the OIB program. See the
instructions for line 21, Total Federal Program Income Received, for additional
information.

VR SSA Payments Transferred to the Client Assistance Program (CAP):

Enter the amount of SSA program income reported on line 21, Total Federal
Program Income Received under the VR program, but transferred by the VR
program to the CAP, as permitted by Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2). This amount must also be reported as program income
earned on the corresponding SF-425 submitted by the CAP. See the instructions
for line 21, Total Federal Program Income Received, for additional information.

VR SSA Payments Transferred to the State Supported Employment Services
(Supported Employment) Program:

Enter the amount of SSA program income reported on line 21, Total Federal
Program Income Received under the VR program, but transferred by the VR

16

---
Page 22

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

program to the Supported Employment program, as permitted by Section 108 of
the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2)). This amount must also be
reported as program income earned on the corresponding RSA-17 submitted by
the Supported Employment program. See the instructions for line 21, Total
Federal Program Income Received for additional information.

Unexpended Program Income (line 21 minus lines 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26):

• • Data entry is not required.

When submitting a final report, this line should be zero.

Note: In accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(3)(ii), “to the extent available,
the non-Federal entity must disburse funds available from program income
(including repayments to a revolving fund), rebates, refunds, contract settlements,
audit recoveries, and interest earned on such funds before requesting additional
cash payments.” Program income received in the VR program and transferred to
an allowable program is considered disbursed for purposes of the VR program
and this requirement.

D. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the FFY of Appropriation
(1st through 4th Quarter)

Overview: Information from this section is used to ensure the VR agency provides the
requisite cost share of allowable non-Federal expenditures incurred during the FFY of

appropriation. At the end of the 4th quarter, the agency’s non-Federal share is based
upon the sum of lines 28, Total Non-Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures (4th
Quarter) and 29, Non-Federal Share of Allowable Unliquidated Obligations (4th
Quarter). In using this calculation, RSA considers the agency’s allowable unliquidated
non-Federal obligations to be expenditures incurred at the time the agency incurred the
obligation to pay the cost with non-Federal funds consistent with 34 C.F.R. § 76.707.
As such, the agency’s non-Federal share of allowable unliquidated obligations are
credited toward meeting the agency’s match requirement. The match calculated by
adding the amounts on lines 28 and 29, as just described, at the end of the FFY of
appropriation (i.e., at the end of the 4th quarter), determines whether the agency has
satisfied its match requirement for the grant award and, thus, is able to carry Federal
funds over to the subsequent fiscal year to the extent such funds remain available for
obligation. In Section E below, VR agencies will report the amount of liquidations from
the amount of non-Federal unliquidated obligations incurred in the FFY of
appropriation, as reported on line 29, but liquidated during the carryover year, which
will be used to determine the actual match for the award based on final report data.

Total Non-Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures
(1st through 4th Quarter):

Enter the total amount of allowable non-Federal VR expenditures incurred

(including any non-Federal expenditures incurred for the provision of pre-

17

---
Page 23

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

employment transition services) for the reporting period. Do not include
expenditures incurred with program income because such expenditures cannot be
used to meet the non-Federal share requirement (34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(4)).

Include on line 28 all allowable non-Federal expenditures incurred under the VR
program, including those incurred in excess of the amount required to satisfy the
non-Federal share (match) requirement under the VR program (i.e., 21.3 percent
of the State’s total expenditures under the VR program) (34 C.F.R. § 361.60(a)(1)
and (b)(1)). VR agencies must report on line 28 all allowable non-Federal
expenditures incurred under the VR program, regardless of the source of funding,
even if the amount reported exceeds the amount of non-Federal share required to
match the total Federal funds awarded. This information is necessary for RSA to
assess whether the State has met its maintenance of effort requirement under
Section 111(a)(2)(B) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.62.

This amount must include the non-Federal share of actual cash disbursements or
expenditures (less any non-Federal portion of rebates, refunds, or other applicable

credits assignable to the VR award), including payments to contractors, and any
expenses included in line 30, Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities
for CRP Purposes, and line 31, Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities
for CRP Purposes.

Non-Federal Share of Allowable Unliquidated Obligations
(1st through 4th Quarter):

Enter the amount of allowable unliquidated obligations to be paid with non-
Federal funds meeting the non-Federal share requirements in
34 C.F.R. § 361.60(b). Non-Federal share can only be credited as match when
obligated, in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 76.707, in the FFY of appropriation for
an award. See line 32 for information about unliquidated obligations counted as
non-Federal share that are liquidated after the 4th quarter report for the FFY of
appropriation (i.e., in the carryover year). When the 4th quarter is marked final,
line 29 should remain blank.

Non-Federal share expected from third-party cooperative arrangement (TPCA)
certified expenditures of public agency staff salaries, when the TPCA staff has not
yet completed the work, may not be included as an unliquidated obligation (or
expenditure) because these expenditures cannot be certified until after the staff
works the requisite number of hours. Pursuant to 34 C.F.R. § 76.707(b), an
obligation for services performed by State agency employees, including TPCA

staff, is incurred at the time the work is performed.

Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes
(1st through 4th Quarter):

Enter the non-Federal share of allowable expenditures, also included on line 28,
Total Non-Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures, incurred during the FFY of

18

---
Page 24

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

appropriation, for the establishment of facilities for CRP purposes. Non-Federal
expenditures for the purpose of establishing a facility for a CRP will not be
counted toward the State’s maintenance of effort (34 C.F.R. § 361.62(b));
however, these non-Federal expenditures count toward satisfying the State’s
match requirement.

Do not include Federal funds used for this purpose. Only include those
expenditures, paid with non-Federal funds, for activities that would meet the
definition of “establishment of a facility for a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(17). Do not include the
expenditures reported on line 28 for staffing or other costs associated with
establishment projects, such as those additional costs included in the definition of
“establishment, development, or improvement of a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16). If no funds were used for this
purpose during the reporting period, enter zero on this line.

Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes
(1st through 4th Quarter):

Enter the non-Federal share of allowable expenditures, also included on line 28,
Total Non-Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures, incurred during the FFY of
appropriation, for the construction of facilities for CRP purposes. Non-Federal
expenditures for the purpose of constructing a facility for a CRP will not be
counted toward the State’s maintenance of effort (Section 101(a)(17)(C) and
34 C.F.R. § 361.62(b)).

Do not include Federal funds used for this purpose. Only include those
expenditures, paid with non-Federal funds, for activities that would meet the
definition of “construction of a facility for a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(10). Do not include the
expenditures reported on line 28 for staffing or other costs associated with
establishment projects, such as those additional costs included in the definition of
“establishment, development, or improvement of a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16). If no funds were used for this
purpose during the reporting period, enter zero on this line.

E. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the Carryover Year
(5th through 8th Quarter)

Overview: As noted in section D above, all non-Federal expenditures and obligations
used for match purposes must be incurred during the FFY of appropriation. During the
carryover year, the VR agency must liquidate all unliquidated obligations reported on

line 29 as having been incurred by the end of the FFY of appropriation but not
liquidated by that time. All unliquidated obligations reported on line 29 for match
purposes, incurred prior to the end of the FFY of appropriation, must be liquidated
within the period of performance for that award (i.e., by the end of the 8th quarter).
However, we recognize unliquidated obligations sometimes fall through during the

19

---
Page 25

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

carryover year and must be cancelled or deobligated. When this occurs, the agency no
longer can count those obligations toward satisfying its match requirement.

If non-Federal unliquidated obligations from the end of the 4th quarter, needed to
carryover funds, are cancelled, but the grantee had access to additional non-Federal
funds prior to end of the 4th quarter, then the grantee may adjust its accounting records
to reassign Federal expenditures paid prior to the end of the FFY of appropriation to
non-Federal funds to increase the amount of non-Federal share the State reported as
having incurred by the end of the FFY of appropriation. The agency has the flexibility
during the carryover year to make accounting adjustments with respect to expenditures
incurred prior to the end of the FFY of appropriation to ensure it continues to satisfy its
match requirement. Such accounting adjustments must be consistent with the State and
agency policies/procedures and Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). To
that end, at the end of the 8th quarter, the actual total match provided by an agency is
the sum of lines 28, Total Non-Federal Share of Allowable Expenditures (4th Quarter)

and 32, Non-Federal Expenditures for Allowable Unliquidated Obligations Reported
on Line 29 - Liquidated After the 4th Quarter (8th Quarter). To be clear, the amount
listed on line 32 only reflects the liquidation in the carryover year of non-Federal
obligations incurred prior to the end of the FFY of appropriation. These are not new
expenditures or obligations incurred during the carryover year, which are reported
below on line 33.

Non-Federal Expenditures for Allowable Unliquidated Obligations Reported on
Line 29 -Liquidated After the 4th Quarter
(5th through 8th Quarter):

• • This line is only used for reports submitted after the 4th quarter of the FFY of
appropriation (i.e., when a grantee has unobligated Federal funds available for
obligation and use in the carry over year). Therefore, a grantee must have met
the requirements of Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act for carrying over
funds in order to report an amount on this line item. If the VR agency did not
qualify for carrying over Federal funds because it did not satisfy the
requirements of Section 19, the agency must mark its 4th quarter report final
and the agency has 90 days after the end of the period of performance to
liquidate all obligations unless a late liquidation request has been approved by

RSA. When the 4th quarter is marked final under these circumstances, line 32
should remain blank.

For those VR agencies who met the requirements of Section 19 of the
Rehabilitation Act to carry over Federal funds, use line 32 to enter the amount of
liquidations from the amount of non-Federal unliquidated obligations reported on
line 29, Non-Federal Share of Allowable Unliquidated Obligations, of the
grantee’s 4th quarter RSA-17 report that were liquidated during the subsequent
reporting period. To be clear, the amount reported on line 32 reflects only the
allowable non-Federal obligations that were reported on line 29 as having been
incurred prior to September 30 of the FFY of appropriation, but which were not
liquidated by that date; line 32 reflects the amount of those reported unliquidated

20

---
Page 26

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

obligations that have been liquidated during the carryover year. State VR agencies
may not report new non-Federal expenditures on line 32 (e.g., those non-Federal
expenditures incurred during the carryover year; those non-Federal expenditures
should be reported on line 33). Non-Federal share can only be counted as match
when obligated by September 30 of the FFYof appropriation of an award as
indicated on line 29 of the grantee’s 4th quarter RSA-17 and liquidated within 90
days after the end of the period of performance for that particular award.

Allowable unliquidated obligations reported on the 4th quarter report (i.e., those
that were incurred during the FFY of appropriation) that are cancelled during
the carryover period, or otherwise not liquidated after the FFY of appropriation,
may not be used toward satisfying the match requirement for the FFY of
appropriation for that particular award because those obligations never came to
fruition for the VR program. This means, a grantee may not have access to its full
Federal award for obligation and use in the carryover year if there were no excess

non-Federal expenditures incurred prior to September 30 of the FFY of
appropriation to cover the loss of these unliquidated obligations that “fell
through” in the carryover year.

Funds for obligations reported on line 29, Non-Federal Share of Allowable
Unliquidated Obligations, cancelled during the carryover period, may not be
reobligated or liquidated for expenditures incurred during the carryover period
and counted as match for the period of performance for the award because,
pursuant to Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act, match must be satisfied by the
end of the FFY of appropriation in order to carry over funds to the subsequent
year.

If non-Federal unliquidated obligations from the end of the 4th quarter, needed to
carryover funds, are cancelled, but the grantee had access to additional non-
Federal funds prior to end of the 4th quarter, then the grantee may adjust its
accounting records to reassign Federal expenditures paid prior to the end of the
FFY of appropriation to non-Federal funds to increase the amount of non-Federal
share the State reported as having incurred by the end of the FFY of
appropriation. This will result in a surplus of Federal cash on hand because
Federal funds previously used to pay for an expenditure have now been adjusted
to be paid with non-Federal funds. In this instance, the RSA-17 submitted by the

grantee for the 4th quarter of the FFY of appropriation must be revised to reflect
an increased non-Federal share of expenditures, line 28, and a decreased amount
of Federal expenditures, line 14. The grantee should ensure its internal controls
address how the excess cash on hand is managed to ensure compliance with the
Cash Management Improvement Act (CMIA) requirements and also note in the
comments section of the RSA-17 the reason for the excess Federal cash on hand.

The grantee is responsible for ensuring that all RSA-17 data submitted, including
changes, are reflected in the State’s accounting system and consistent with the
State’s and agency’s accounting policies/procedures and GAAP.

21

---
Page 27

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Additional New Non-Federal Expenditures
(5th through 8th Quarter):

For purposes of the VR program, a State must report all non-Federal expenditures
in the FFY in which those expenditures are incurred for purposes of satisfying the
maintenance of effort (MOE) requirement at Section 111(a)(2)(B) of the
Rehabilitation Act because MOE is determined on an FFY basis, not on the basis
of a period of performance for an entire grant award. Enter on line 33 the amount,
if any, of new non-Federal expenditures incurred during the carryover year. The
amount on line 33, if any, represents new expenditures and obligations incurred
during the carryover year, in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 76.707. The amount
reported on line 33 must not include the liquidation of obligations that were
incurred during the FFY of appropriation, and reported on line 29, but liquidated
during the carryover year and reported on line 32. The non-Federal expenditures
reported on line 33, if any, will not count toward the prior FFY of appropriation’s

match requirement, but will count toward the current FFY’s MOE requirement.

For example, State A incurs sufficient non-Federal expenditures by the end of the
FFY of Appropriation for FFY 2019 to carry over unexpended Federal funds into
the subsequent FFY (FFY 2020) for obligation and use in accordance with
Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act. Even though State A provided sufficient
non-Federal expenditures during FFY 2019 to match the Federal funds carried
over, as the State continues to spend in the carryover year, the State’s accounting
system still divides every expenditure incurred during the carryover year of FFY
2020 into its Federal share (78.7 percent) and non-Federal share (21.3 percent).
Although these non-Federal expenditures are incurred under the FFY 2019 VR
grant award, the non-Federal expenditures incurred in FFY 2020 must be
reported, for MOE purposes, on line 33 of the RSA-17 for FFY 2019 to ensure
they are included for FFY 2020 MOE purposes.

Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes
(5th through 8th Quarter):

Enter the non-Federal share of expenditures, also included on line 33, Additional
New Non-Federal Expenditures, incurred during the carryover year, for the
establishment of facilities for CRP purposes. Non-Federal expenditures for the
purpose of establishing a facility for a CRP will not be counted toward the State’s
maintenance of effort (34 C.F.R. § 361.62(b)).

Do not include Federal funds used for this purpose. Only include those

expenditures, paid with non-Federal funds, for activities that would meet the
definition of “establishment of a facility for a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(17). Do not include expenditures
for staffing or other costs associated with establishment projects, such as those
additional costs included in the definition of “establishment, development, or
improvement of a public or nonprofit community rehabilitation program” at

22

---
Page 28

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16). If no funds were used for this purpose during the
reporting period, enter zero on this line.

Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes
(5th through 8th Quarter):

Enter the non-Federal share of allowable expenditures, also included on line 33,
Additional New Non-Federal Expenditures, incurred during the carryover year,
for the construction of facilities for CRP purposes. Non-Federal expenditures for
the purpose of constructing a facility for a CRP will not be counted toward the
State’s maintenance of effort (Section 101(a)(17)(C) and 34 C.F.R. § 361.62(b)).

Do not include Federal funds used for this purpose. Only include those
expenditures, paid with non-Federal funds, for activities that would meet the
definition of “construction of a facility for a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(10). Do not include expenditures
for staffing or other costs associated with establishment projects, such as those
additional costs included in the definition of “establishment, development, or
improvement of a public or nonprofit community rehabilitation program” at

34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16). If no funds were used for this purpose during the
reporting period, enter zero on this line.

F. Indirect Expenses

Indirect costs (2 C.F.R. § 200.5) are generally charged to Federal awards via an
approved indirect cost rate or cost allocation plan. Any State grantee that wishes to
claim indirect costs under Federal grants through an indirect cost rate must prepare an
indirect cost rate proposal (2 C.F.R. § 200.57) and submit it to the cognizant Federal
agency for approval (2 C.F.R. part 200, Appendix VII, paragraph D). State grantees
claiming indirect expenses based on a cost allocation plan (2 C.F.R. part 200, Appendix
VII, paragraph F.3), rather than an indirect cost rate, must develop, document, maintain
for audit, or submit, as appropriate, a narrative cost allocation methodology for indirect
costs to the cognizant agency for review, negotiation, and approval. Grantees with
indirect cost rates that change between State fiscal years must use separate rows for
each approved indirect cost rate applicable to expenditures incurred during the period
of performance.

23

---
Page 29

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Federal Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs:

Enter the name of the Federal cognizant agency that approved the agency’s
indirect cost rate or cost allocation plan.

• a. Type of Rate(s):

Select whether the approved indirect cost rate is Provisional, Predetermined,
Final, or Fixed. If indirect costs are based on an approved cost allocation plan,
select cost allocation plan.

• b. Rate:

Enter the approved indirect cost rate(s) in effect during the reporting period.
For cost allocation plans only, enter “100” percent, representing the total net
costs attributable to this award.

• c. Period From:

Enter the beginning effective date(s) for the approved indirect cost rate(s).

• d. Period To:

Enter the ending date(s) for the approved indirect cost rate(s).

• e. Base:

Enter the amount of the base against which the approved indirect cost rate(s)
was applied. The base includes allowable expenditures to which the approved
indirect cost rate may be applied. For cost allocation plans, enter the total
amount of the cost allocation plan costs (include both non-Federal and
Federal).

• f. Amount Charged (line 36b multiplied by line 36e):

• • Data entry is not required.

• g. Federal Share:

Enter the Federal share of the amount in 36f, Amount Charged.

• h. Totals:

• • Data entry is not required.

24

---
Page 30

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

G. Federal and Non-Federal Expenditures (Include Expenditures Incurred with
Program Income — Do NOT Include Unliquidated Obligations)

Administrative Expenditures:

Include on this line all expenditures incurred in the performance of administrative
functions under the VR program, including expenses related to program planning,
development, monitoring, evaluation, and infrastructure expenditures for the one-
stop service delivery system. See definition of “administrative costs,” for
purposes of the VR program, at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(2). Include program income
expenditures, but do not include any unliquidated obligations. Examples include,
but are not limited to: expenditures for quality assurance; budgeting, accounting,
financial management and information systems; providing program information to
the public; technical assistance and support services to other State agencies,
private nonprofit organizations, and businesses and industries; State
Rehabilitation Council and other advisory committees; professional organization
membership dues for designated State unit (DSU) employees; the removal of

architectural barriers in State VR agency offices and State-operated rehabilitation
facilities; operating and maintaining DSU facilities, equipment, and grounds;
supplies; administration of Comprehensive System of Personnel Development,
including personnel administration, training and staff development; administrative
salaries, including support staff; travel expenditures; expenditures incurred in
conducting reviews of determinations made by personnel of the DSU; and legal
expenses (34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(2)).

Expenditures Incurred for the Provision of Pre-employment Transition Services
Provided by Agency Staff Only:

Report in this category expenditures made by the VR agency for pre-employment
transition services provided directly by its personnel. VR agencies are responsible
for ensuring the agency’s tracking of time and attendance includes the ability to
track staff time spent providing the “required,” “authorized,” and coordination
pre-employment transition service activities, respectively. Only in this manner,
can a VR agency ensure that it can provide all “required” pre-employment
transition services needed by students with disabilities in the State and
coordination activities, as described in Section 113(b) and (d), respectively, of the
Rehabilitation Act, before providing other “authorized” pre-employment
transition services permitted under Section 113(c) of the Rehabilitation Act.

Include only those services for which the reserved funds may be used (e.g.,
required, authorized and coordination pre-employment transition service
activities) including as well as other VR services necessary to benefit from the
required pre-employment transition services (see Notice of Interpretation: Pre-
Employment Transition Services Flexibility Regarding the Use of Federal
Vocational Rehabilitation Funds published in the Federal Register on February
28, 2020). Do not include administrative expenses related to rent, utilities, and
supplies, etc., in this section.

25

---
Page 31

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

• a. Required and Coordination Pre-employment Transition Services Provided by
VR Agency Staff Only:

Enter the salary and benefits cost allocable to the provision of required pre-
employment transition services provided by VR agency staff. In addition,
include the salary and benefits cost allocable to the provision of pre-
employment transition coordination activities provided by VR agency staff.
Documentation must support the distribution of the employee’s salary or
wages to the specific activity (2 C.F.R. § 200.430(i)). Section 113(b) of the
Rehabilitation Act describes the required pre-employment transition services
that must be provided to students with disabilities. Section 113(d) of the
Rehabilitation Act describes pre-employment transition services coordination
activities.

• b. Authorized Pre-employment Transition Services Provided by VR Agency
Staff Only:

Enter the salary and benefits cost allocable to the provision of authorized pre-
employment transition services provided by VR agency staff. Documentation

must support the distribution of the employee’s salary or wages to the specific
activity (2 C.F.R. § 200.430(i)). Section 113(c) of the Rehabilitation Act
describes the authorized pre-employment transition services that may be
provided on behalf of students with disabilities.

Services to Groups:

Enter the amount of Federal and non-Federal funds, including program income,
expended for each of the following services to groups of individuals with
disabilities in accordance with Section 103(b) of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.49.

• a. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of CRPs.

• • Data entry is not required.

• b. Telecommunication Systems (34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(2)).

• c. Special Services to Provide Nonvisual Access to Information
(34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(3)).

• d. Technical Assistance to Businesses (34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(4)).

• e. Business Enterprise Program (34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)).

• f. Transition Consultation and Technical Assistance (34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(6)).

• g. Transition Services to Youth and Students (34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(7)).

26

---
Page 32

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

• h. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of Assistive Technology
(34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(8)).

• i. Support for Advanced Training (34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(9)).

American Job Center Infrastructure Expenditures:

Enter the total amount of Federal and Non-Federal funds disbursed for payment of
American Job Center (AJC)/one-stop center infrastructure expenditures. The
Federal share amount listed on line 40 is also included on line 14, which identifies
the total amount of all Federal expenditures incurred under the VR program for all
purposes, and line 40, Administrative Costs. Similarly, the non-Federal share
included in line 40 is included in line 28 or 33, in accordance with those line item
instructions, which include the total amount of non-Federal expenditures incurred
under the VR program for all purposes, and line 40, Administrative Expenditures.

Infrastructure expenditures for AJCs are defined as non-personnel costs that are
necessary for the general operation of the one-stop center, including: rental of the
facilities; utilities and maintenance; equipment (including assessment-related and
assistive technology for individuals with disabilities); and technology to facilitate
access to the one-stop center, including technology used for the center’s planning
and outreach activities (WIOA sec. 121(h)(4), 34 C.F.R. § 361.700). This list is

not exhaustive. For example, expenditures for the development and use of the
common identifier (i.e., AJC signage) and supplies, as defined in the Uniform
Guidance at 2 C.F.R. § 200.94, used to support the general operation of the one-
stop center, may be considered allowable infrastructure expenditures. It is
important to note that VR funds used to pay for the VR program’s proportional
share of the infrastructure costs of the AJCs are considered “administrative costs,”
as defined in 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(2), for purposes of the VR program.

Non-personnel expenditures include all expenditures that are not compensation
for personal services. For example, payments for technology-related services
performed by vendors or contractors are non-personnel expenditures and may be
identified as infrastructure expenditures if they are necessary for the general
operation of the one-stop center. Such expenditures may include service contracts
with vendors or contractors, equipment, and supplies. Do not include non-cash or
third-party in-kind contributions.

For additional information about infrastructure expenditures, refer to
TAC 17-03: Infrastructure Funding of the One-Stop Delivery System.

27

---
Page 33

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Innovation and Expansion (I&E) Expenditures:

Enter the total amount of Federal and non-Federal funds expended for the
development and implementation of innovative approaches to expand and
improve the provision of vocational rehabilitation services to individuals with
disabilities in accordance with (Section 101(a)(18) of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.35).

• a. I&E Expenditures Supporting State Rehabilitation Council Resource Plan.

Of the total amount of I&E expenditures reported on line 41, enter the amount
that was expended for I&E expenditures supporting the State Rehabilitation
Council resource plan (34 C.F.R. § 361.35(a)(2)).

• b. I&E Expenditures Supporting the State Independent Living Council Resource
Plan.

Of the total amount of I&E expenditures reported on line 41, enter the amount
that was expended for I&E expenditures supporting the State Independent
Living Council resource plan (34 C.F.R. § 361.35(a)(3)).

H. Remarks

Remarks:

This section can be used, as needed, to clarify and explain amounts reported and
changes from amounts previously reported.

I. Certification

By signing this report, I certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that the report is
true, complete, and accurate, and the expenditures, disbursements and cash receipts are
for the purposes and objectives set forth in the terms and conditions of the Federal
award. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or fraudulent information, or the omission
of any material fact, may subject me to criminal, civil or administrative penalties for

fraud, false statements, false claims or otherwise. (U.S. Code Title 18, Section 1001 and
Title 31, Sections 3729-3730 and 3801-3812).

Name and Title of Authorized Certifying Official:

Enter the name and title of the authorized certifying official.

Telephone (Area code, number, and extension):

Enter the telephone number of the authorized certifying official using the
specified format.

28

---
Page 34

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Email Address:

Enter the email address of the authorized certifying official.

Signature of Authorized Certifying Official:

Date Report Submitted (Month, Day, Year):

Enter the date the report is submitted using the specified format.

29