DCL-25-01-Final_0

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

Date: October 18, 2024
DCL-25-01

Dear Colleagues:

As individuals with disabilities seek to achieve and excel in competitive integrated employment
(CIE), assistive technology (AT), from low-tech communication aids to sophisticated software,
has helped level the playing field. In addition to advances in AT, the field of vocational
rehabilitation (VR) is now navigating the impact that artificial intelligence (AI)1 can have in
supporting individuals with disabilities to achieve CIE. As President Biden said in his landmark
Executive Order 14110: Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial
Intelligence (EO 14110), responsible AI use has the potential to help solve urgent challenges,
while making our world more prosperous, productive, innovative, and secure. Responsible AI
use and innovation, as explained in EO 14110, involves mitigating the risks of AI in order to
realize its benefits. Irresponsible or uninformed use could exacerbate societal harms such as
discrimination, bias, and disempowered workers. Recognizing this risk, EO 14110 tasked the
U.S. Access Board and other Federal agencies with identifying and developing possible solutions
to potential or existing civil rights concerns, accessibility barriers, and risks of AI, as well as
promoting and creating safe, equitable, and accessible AI.2

As the landscape of AI continues to evolve, I urge us all to commit to ensuring with outspoken
intention that individuals with disabilities are early and active participants in AI developments.
History has proven that in the technology industry’s rush to be first to market, accessibility for
individuals with disabilities is often an afterthought, a luxury to be added on later. In honor of
October’s National Disability Employment Awareness Month, I am pleased to celebrate the
value and talent individuals with disabilities add to America’s workplaces and economy,
including instances in which AI propels such opportunity.

The purpose of this Dear Colleague Letter is to encourage states to drive responsible AI
innovation focused on better serving individuals with disabilities. The Rehabilitation Services
Administration has identified three ways that AI has the potential to support individuals with
disabilities in achieving CIE and to solve urgent challenges in the field:

The VR program should intentionally support the AI literacy of individuals with
disabilities and prepare interested individuals with disabilities for careers in AI.

1 The term “artificial intelligence” or “AI” has the meaning set forth in 15 U.S.C. 9401(3): a machine-based system
that can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing
real or virtual environments. Artificial intelligence systems use machine- and human-based inputs to perceive real
and virtual environments; abstract such perceptions into models through analysis in an automated manner; and use
model inference to formulate options for information or action.
2 U.S. Access Board Memorandum of Understanding on Artificial Intelligence, https://www.access-board.gov/ai-
mou/; retrieved October 11, 2024.
400 MARYLAND AVE. S.W., WASHINGTON, DC 20202-2800
www.ed.gov
The Department of Education’s mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness
by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.

---
Page 2

Page 2 – DCL on Responsible AI Use

The VR program should be intentional in the ways it uses responsible AI to support CIE
in any career field that an individual with disabilities chooses.

States may use responsible AI to create efficiencies in the operation of the VR program.
Intentionally Supporting AI Literacy and Preparing for Careers in AI

VR agencies should provide the services and supports necessary for individuals with disabilities
to gain the technical skills to achieve CIE in AI careers, such as machine learning or systems
engineering, if that is the individual’s choice. VR agencies play a key role in the skills training
and career development opportunities, including internships and apprenticeships, needed to
prepare individuals with disabilities to be competitive in this evolving job market.
Using Responsible AI to Support CIE in Any Career Field

AI has the potential to remove longstanding barriers to CIE in self-selected careers for
individuals with disabilities by providing needed accommodations and individualized support.
As examples, AI-enabled software applications using speech synthesis and braille, universal
design of AI tools that all employees use, and reasonable accommodations that leverage AI are
now available. AI may also serve as a tool to address known challenges, offer additional support
that may unlock an employee’s potential by reducing unknown barriers, and create expanded
opportunities for success.

Responsible AI use is already benefiting individuals with disabilities. As examples:
• • The Employer Assistance and Resource Network on Disability Inclusion (EARN) article,

Use of Artificial Intelligence to Facilitate Employment Opportunities for People with
Disabilities, notes a variety of ways that AI can facilitate employment opportunities for
individuals with disabilities.
• • Representative Jennifer Wexton uses an AI voice on the floor of the U.S. House of

Representatives.
• • Johns Hopkins University researchers have developed a navigation system that enables
blind or visually impaired users to navigate their surroundings.

Using Responsible AI to Create Efficient Program Operations

AI presents an opportunity to maximize the quality and efficiency of VR services. This can
include improvements to VR counseling and case management with the support of AI. An article
in The Rehabilitation Professional provides several examples, including that “AI algorithms have
been shown to enhance assessment and planning, resulting in more targeted and effective service
plans.”3 Washington State’s Department of Social and Health Services AI chatbot tool illustrates
opportunities for resources to improve customer service (DSHS’ Division of Vocational
Rehabilitation introduces Innovative Artificial Intelligence Tool). Other examples include remote
VR service delivery (Enhancing Remote VR Services with Smart Tech and AI).

3 Davenport, T. & Kalakota, R. (2019), as cited in Skerritt, C., & Wolstein, D. (2023). Use of Artificial Intelligence
to enhance case management and job development practices in rehabilitation counseling. The Rehabilitation
Professional, 31(2), 19-25.

---
Page 3

Page 3 – DCL on Responsible AI Use

It is critical that VR agencies, advocacy groups, and individuals with disabilities are co-creators
of policies, plans, and products that impact them. Similarly, these same individuals should be
involved in the ongoing refinement and implementation of these policies, plans, and products.
We have urgent challenges, and the individuals who we serve can benefit from responsible AI
innovation that aims to provide the support they need to be prosperous and productive. However,
this will only happen if we all work together to ensure that these emerging technologies are
developed and used in a safe and inclusive manner.

We expect to discuss this Dear Colleague letter and anticipate working together on responsible
AI use to support individuals with disabilities in the VR program at future gatherings with
stakeholders. I look forward to championing the inclusion of individuals with disabilities at the
forefront of the AI revolution. May we all draw on the words of inventor Lewis Howard Latimer:
“[w]e create our future, by well improving present opportunities.”

Sincerely,

/s/
Danté Q. Allen
Commissioner

Enclosure

---
Page 4

Page 4 – DCL on Responsible AI Use

Additional Resources
• • AI and Employment: Emerging Experiences and Resources in Vocational Rehabilitation
(U.S. Department of Education, Vocational Rehabilitation Technical Assistance Center

for Quality Employment)
• • Accelerating Research on Generative Artificial Intelligence (U.S. Department of
Education, Institute of Education Science)

• • Accessible & Inclusive Technology (U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Disability
Employment Policy)

• • Algorithms, Artificial Intelligence, and Disability Discrimination in Hiring (U.S.
Department of Justice)

• • Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights (The White House)
• • Let’s Explore the Emergence of Artificial Intelligence Work Tools (U.S. Department of

Health and Human Services, The Disability Employment Technical Assistance Center)
• • Tips for Workers: The Americans with Disabilities Act and the Use of Software,
Algorithms, and Artificial Intelligence (The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity

Commission)

Legal Disclaimer
This document contains resources that are provided for the user’s convenience. The inclusion
of any of these materials is not intended to reflect its importance, nor is it intended to endorse
any views expressed, or products or services offered. These materials may contain the views
and recommendations of various subject matter experts as well as hypertext links, contact
addresses, and websites to information created and maintained by other public and private

organizations. The opinions expressed in any of these materials do not necessarily reflect the
positions or policies of the U.S. Department of Education (Department). The Department
does not control or guarantee the accuracy, relevance, timeliness, or completeness of any
outside information included in these materials. Inclusion of such information does not
constitute an endorsement by the Department or the Federal government, or a
preference/support for these examples as compared with others that might be available and
be presented. Additionally, this discussion should not imply an endorsement of any
organization, curriculum, or learning model.