DCL-25-02RSA-17-Instructions-FINAL0

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
COMMISSIONER

Date: December 2, 2024
DCL-25-02

Dear Colleagues:

Through this Dear Colleague Letter (DCL-25-02), the Rehabilitation Services Administration
• (RSA) is transmitting a copy of the revised Vocational Rehabilitation Financial Report (RSA-17)

form and instructions for the State Vocational Rehabilitation Services (VR) program. Due to the
minimal nature of the changes, the revisions to the RSA-17 are effective immediately. The RSA-
17 collects semiannual cumulative VR financial data on an award-by-award basis.

For your convenience, the edits to the form and instructions include:
• • Making the instructions consistent with OMBs April 22, 2024, revisions to 2 C.F.R. part
200 (89 FR 07496);
• • Making the instructions consistent with ED’s General Administrative Regulations
• (EDGAR) final rule published in the Federal Register on August 29, 2024 and effective
as of September 30, 2024;
• • Requiring completing of line 36, Federal Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs;
• • Adding Department Temporary Rate and De Minimis Rate as a selection option under

line 36(a), Indirect Cost Rate Type pursuant to Department guidance;
• • Clarifying when to submit an Annual or Final report;
• • Clarifying that the individual submitting the report, if not the certifying official, is
verifying that the certifying official has signed a physical copy of the form, and the
signed form is available upon request; and
• • Making minor miscellaneous typographical edits.

This DCL rescinds and replaces the previous RSA-17 instructions, DCL-23-03, that RSA issued
on September 8, 2023. If you have any questions about completing the RSA-17, please contact
the Financial Management Specialist assigned to your agency.

Sincerely,

Danté Q. Allen

Attachment

400 MARYLAND AVE. S.W., WASHINGTON, DC 20202-2600
www.ed.gov
The Department of Education’s mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness
by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.

verifying that the certifying official has signed a physical copy of the form, and the
signed form is available upon request; and

---
Page 2

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION FINANCIAL REPORT (RSA-17)
A. Grant Award Information
Federal Award Identification 2. Federal Fiscal Year 3. Grant Period (From/To)
Number

Recipient Organization
Basis of Accounting 6. Reporting Period 7. Final Report
Accrual End Date
☐
Cash
☐
UEI Number 9. Recipient Account Number or Identifying Number
B. Federal Funds Amount
Total Federal Funds Awarded
Federal Cash Receipts
Federal Cash Disbursements
Federal Cash on Hand
Federal Share of Expenditures (do not include program income)
Federal Expenditures Incurred for the Provision of Pre-employment Transition
Service Activities and Certain Other VR Services Needed to Access or Benefit from
Pre-Employment Transition Services (only include expenses charged to the Federal
funds required to be reserved for pre-employment transition services)
• a. Required and Coordination Pre-employment Transition Service Activities and
Other VR Services that Support Access to and Participation in Pre-Employment
Transition Services
• b. Authorized Pre-employment Transition Service Activities
Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes
Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes
Federal Share of Unliquidated Obligations
Total Federal Share
Unobligated Balance of Federal Funds
C. Federal Program Income Amount
Total Federal Program Income Received
Program Income Expended in Accordance with the Addition Alternative
SSA Payments Transferred to the State Independent Living Services Program
SSA Payments Transferred to the Independent Living Services for Older Individuals
who are Blind Program
SSA Payments Transferred to the Client Assistance Program
SSA Payments Transferred to the State Supported Employment Services Program
Unexpended Program Income
• D. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the FFY of Appropriation (1st - 4th Qtr.) Amount
Total Non-Federal Share of Expenditures (1st - 4th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share of Unliquidated Obligations (1st - 4th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes (1st – 4th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes (1st - 4th Qtr.)

Data entry is required.

VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION FINANCIAL REPORT (RSA-17)
A. Grant Award Information
| 1. Federal Award Identification
Number | 2. Federal Fiscal Year | 3. Grant Period (From/To) | | |
4. Recipient Organization
| 5. Basis of Accounting
Accrual
☐
Cash | 6. Reporting Period
End Date | 7. Final Report | | |
| ☐
UEI Number | 9. Recipient Account Number or Identifying Number | | | |
B. Federal Funds Amount
10. Total Federal Funds Awarded
11. Federal Cash Receipts
12. Federal Cash Disbursements
13. Federal Cash on Hand
14. Federal Share of Expenditures (do not include program income)
15. Federal Expenditures Incurred for the Provision of Pre-employment Transition
Service Activities and Certain Other VR Services Needed to Access or Benefit from
Pre-Employment Transition Services (only include expenses charged to the Federal
funds required to be reserved for pre-employment transition services)
a. Required and Coordination Pre-employment Transition Service Activities and
Other VR Services that Support Access to and Participation in Pre-Employment
Transition Services
b. Authorized Pre-employment Transition Service Activities
16. Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes
17. Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes
18. Federal Share of Unliquidated Obligations
19. Total Federal Share
20. Unobligated Balance of Federal Funds
C. Federal Program Income Amount
21. Total Federal Program Income Received
22. Program Income Expended in Accordance with the Addition Alternative
23. SSA Payments Transferred to the State Independent Living Services Program
24. SSA Payments Transferred to the Independent Living Services for Older Individuals
who are Blind Program
25. SSA Payments Transferred to the Client Assistance Program
26. SSA Payments Transferred to the State Supported Employment Services Program
27. Unexpended Program Income
D. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the FFY of Appropriation (1st - 4th Qtr.) Amount
28. Total Non-Federal Share of Expenditures (1st - 4th Qtr.)
29. Non-Federal Share of Unliquidated Obligations (1st - 4th Qtr.)
30. Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes (1st – 4th Qtr.)
31. Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes (1st - 4th Qtr.)

---
Page 3

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

• E. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the Carryover Year (5th – 8th Qtr.) Amount
Non-Federal Expenditures for Unliquidated Obligations Reported on the 4th Quarter
Report, Line 29, Liquidated After the 4th Quarter (5th – 8th Qtr.)
Additional New Non-Federal Expenditures (5th – 8th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes (5th – 8th Qtr.)
Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes (5th – 8th Qtr.)
F. Indirect Expenses
Federal Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs:
• a. Type b. Rate c. Period d. Period e. Base f. Amount g. Federal
From To Charged Share

• h. Totals
G. Select Federal and Non-Federal Expenditures
(Include Program Income — Do NOT Include Unliquidated Obligations) Amount
Administrative Expenditures
N/A
Services to Groups
• a. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of CRP

• b. Telecommunication Systems
• c. Special Services to Provide Nonvisual Access to Information
• d. Technical Assistance to Businesses
• e. Business Enterprise Program (Randolph-Sheppard Program)
• f. Transition Consultation and Technical Assistance
• g. Transition Services to Youth and Students
• h. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of Assistive Technology
• i. Support for Advanced Training
American Job Center Infrastructure Expenditures
Total Innovation and Expansion (I&E) Expenditures

• a. I&E Expenditures Supporting State Rehabilitation Council Resource Plan
• b. I&E Expenditures Supporting Statewide Independent Living Council Resource Plan
H. Remarks
Remarks

• I. Certification: By signing this report, I certify that it is true, complete, and accurate to the best
of my knowledge. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or fraudulent information may subject
me to criminal, civil, or administrative penalties. (U.S. Code, Title 18, Section 1001)
Full Legal Name of Signer
• a. Certifying Official Title
Telephone (Area code, number)
• a. Telephone Extension (if any)

Email Address
Signature
Date Report Submitted
Data entry is required. Expiration: 09/30/2026

E. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the Carryover Year (5th – 8th Qtr.) Amount
32. Non-Federal Expenditures for Unliquidated Obligations Reported on the 4th Quarter
Report, Line 29, Liquidated After the 4th Quarter (5th – 8th Qtr.)
33. Additional New Non-Federal Expenditures (5th – 8th Qtr.)
34. Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes (5th – 8th Qtr.)
35. Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes (5th – 8th Qtr.)
F. Indirect Expenses
36. Federal Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs:
| a. Type | | b. Rate | | c. Period
From | | | | d. Period
To | | e. Base | | f. Amount
Charged | | g. Federal
Share |
h. Totals
G. Select Federal and Non-Federal Expenditures
(Include Program Income — Do NOT Include Unliquidated Obligations) Amount
37. Administrative Expenditures
38. N/A
39. Services to Groups
a. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of CRP
b. Telecommunication Systems
c. Special Services to Provide Nonvisual Access to Information
d. Technical Assistance to Businesses
e. Business Enterprise Program (Randolph-Sheppard Program)
f. Transition Consultation and Technical Assistance
g. Transition Services to Youth and Students
h. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of Assistive Technology
i. Support for Advanced Training
40. American Job Center Infrastructure Expenditures
41. Total Innovation and Expansion (I&E) Expenditures
a. I&E Expenditures Supporting State Rehabilitation Council Resource Plan
b. I&E Expenditures Supporting Statewide Independent Living Council Resource Plan
H. Remarks
42. Remarks
I. Certification: By signing this report, I certify that it is true, complete, and accurate to the best
of my knowledge. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or fraudulent information may subject
me to criminal, civil, or administrative penalties. (U.S. Code, Title 18, Section 1001)
43. Full Legal Name of Signer
a. Certifying Official Title
44. Telephone (Area code, number)
a. Telephone Extension (if any)
45. Email Address
46. Signature
47. Date Report Submitted

---
Page 4

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Paperwork Burden Statement

According to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, no persons are required to respond to a
collection of information unless such collection displays a valid OMB control number. The valid
OMB control number for this information collection is 1820-0017. Public reporting burden for
this collection of information is estimated to average 32.7 minutes/hours per response, including
time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. The obligation to
respond to this collection is voluntary. If you have any comments concerning the accuracy of the
time estimate, suggestions for improving this individual collection, or if you have comments or
concerns regarding the status of your individual form, application or survey, please contact
David Steele, U.S. Department of Education, Rehabilitation Services Administration, Rm 4A-
210, Washington, D.C. 20202 or email RSAfiscal@ed.gov.

---
Page 5

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

I. General Information

The RSA-17 is a cumulative report that captures the financial status of a specific Federal
VR grant award identified by the Federal Award Identification Number (FAIN) in data
element A.1 (e.g., H126A230XXX) at a specific point in time. Recipients use the form to
report cumulative obligations and expenses that are calculated by adding all transactions
from the beginning of the period of performance for the award (i.e., beginning of the
reporting period) to the end of the reporting period specified on the RSA-17. This means
the Federal award data reported throughout the RSA-17, including but not limited to
those in Section B, Federal Funds, must specifically account for Federal award

drawdowns, disbursements, expenditures, obligations, and unobligated funds directly
associated with the FAIN identified in data element A.1.

Recipients are required to maintain supporting documentation to substantiate the financial
data reported on the RSA-17, as is true for any financial reports submitted by the
recipient (2 C.F.R. § 200.302(a)). Additionally, the recipient’s financial and accounting
systems must be sufficient to permit the preparation of reports required by general and
program-specific terms and conditions; and the tracing of funds to a level of expenditures
adequate to establish that such funds have been used according to the Federal statutes,
regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award (Id.). This means
recipients must ensure their supporting documentation identifies transactions that directly
tie to the FAIN identified in A.1, not just transactions that occurred during the reporting
period.

Typically, the RSA-17 will be available online the next working day after the end date of
the reporting period. A recipient is required to submit an RSA-17 report semi-annually

for every grant award’s period of performance, regardless of whether obligations or
expenses were incurred during any reporting period.

Once the award period has begun, a recipient is required to submit an RSA-17 report,
regardless of whether expenses were incurred. If expenses were not incurred during the
reporting period, the recipient must report zeros in the required data elements.

Agencies are responsible for having internal controls necessary to ensure RSA-17 data
are accurate, complete, reliable and submitted timely to RSA. Agencies may request that
an RSA-17 report be re-opened for revision. The RSA Financial Management Specialist
assigned to the recipient will review the request and, if necessary, place the form in an
edit status to permit the recipient to make changes.

It is particularly important that a recipient revise its 4th quarter RSA-17 report if any
accounting adjustments made after the report has been submitted change the amount of
expenditures reported as of the end of the 4th quarter reporting period. For example,

sometimes recipients may make accounting adjustments using journal vouchers to
reassign expenditures, already reported in a prior period, to another funding source (e.g.,
Federal or State). These adjustments, after the expenditure has been reported, would

1

---
Page 6

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

require revisions to the previously submitted financial reports based upon when the
obligation or expenditure was incurred.

Forms must be submitted electronically through the RSA Management Information
System (RSAMIS). In addition, recipients should maintain a hard copy of the report,
signed by the certifying official, for verification purposes.

To enter data into this form online, visit rsa.ed.gov. To enter data, individuals must have
a user ID. If you do not have a user ID, the procedures for obtaining one are located at:
rsa.ed.gov/help/technical-support

If any of the information in pre-populated or calculated data fields is inaccurate, please
contact the RSA Financial Management Specialist assigned to your award.

II. Definitions and Technical Assistance

• A. Allowable Cost — (See definition in 2 C.F.R. § 200.403)

Only allowable VR program costs are reported on the RSA-17.

• B. Applicable Credits — (See definition in 2 C.F.R. § 200.406(a))

The applicable credit must be applied to the Federal fiscal year (FFY) from which the
initial cost expenditure was made. If the initial expense was paid with non-Federal
funds, the applicable credit is applied to the fund from which the initial expenditure
was made (in other words, non-Federal funds). For expenses funded by both non-
Federal and Federal funds, the credit is applied to each funding source in proportion

to the initial amounts paid. Refunds to Federal and non-Federal funds may require an
adjustment to data fields on the RSA-17 report, including reports previously
submitted. Grantees should contact their Financial Management Specialist for
technical assistance.

• C. Carryover — The unobligated balance of authorized Federal funds that a recipient
may obligate and expend in a subsequent FFY provided the State met the cost sharing
requirements by the end of the FFY of appropriation (Section 19 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973, as amended (Rehabilitation Act) and 34 C.F.R. § 361.64).

D. Disbursement — The act of paying out money.

E. Expenditures — (See definition in 2 C.F.R. § 200.1)

References to subrecipients in the definition above are not applicable to the VR
program since there is no authority under the Rehabilitation Act or its implementing

regulations for subawarding, also known as subgranting (see Prohibition Against
Supplanting Grant Award Notification (GAN) Attachment).

2

---
Page 7

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

• F. Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) of Appropriation — The FFY of appropriation is the FFY
for which Congress appropriated funds to the U.S. Department of Education (ED)
from which ED awards program grants, specifically the period from October 1
through September 30. For example, the FFY 2023 VR grants were made from the
2023 FFY of appropriation, which covered the period of October 1, 2022, through
September 30, 2023.

• G. Financial Obligations — (See definition in 2 C.F.R. § 200.1)

There is no authority for subawards, as defined in 2 C.F.R. § 200.1, under the VR
program. Additionally, the future period in which obligations may be liquidated is
limited by Federal requirements and the terms and conditions applicable to the award.

Education Department General Administrative Regulations (EDGAR) at
34 C.F.R. § 76.707 provide additional guidance regarding when obligations are made.
For example, travel is considered obligated when the travel is taken, and personnel
expenditures for State agency employees are considered obligated when the employee
performs the services.

In determining when an obligation is made, recipients must also follow their State
laws, regulations, and policies and procedures, as applicable.

If the recipient has not met the requirements of Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act to
carry over Federal funds for obligation and expenditure in the subsequent fiscal year,
the recipient must incur all obligations, for which it has provided sufficient match
funds, by the end of the FFY of appropriation (i.e., September 30). In this
circumstance, the period of performance and the FFY of appropriation are the same.

If the recipient has met the carryover requirements by the end of the FFY of

appropriation, the period of performance will be extended to include the carryover
period (subsequent FFY). This will enable the recipient to incur new obligations
against Federal award funds during the carryover period, as indicated by the revised
period of performance on the GAN. In other words, in this circumstance, the period
of performance covers two FFYs – the FFY of appropriation plus the carryover year.

Regardless of the accounting basis a recipient uses, it must assign, track, and report
financial obligations made against Federal and non-Federal sources.

H. Liquidation — The issuance of payment for an obligation.

• I. Period of Performance — (See definition in 2 C.F.R. § 200.1)

ED, as the Federal awarding agency, must include start and end dates of the period of
performance in the Federal award. For purposes of ED’s GANs, the period of
performance is referred to as the Federal Funding Period (Box 6 of the GAN).

3

---
Page 8

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

• J. Program Income — (See definitions in 2 C.F.R. § 200.1 and 34 C.F.R. § 361.63)

Program income cannot be used to meet the non-Federal share requirement
(34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(4)). Sources of program income include, but are not limited to
–
• • Payments from the Social Security Administration (SSA) for assisting SSA
beneficiaries and recipients to achieve employment outcomes, including the Cost
Reimbursement and Ticket to Work programs;
• • Payments received from workers’ compensation funds; payments directly
received by the VR agency from insurers, consumers, or others for services to

defray part or all the costs of services provided to individuals; and
• • Income generated by a State-operated community rehabilitation program (CRP)
for activities authorized under this part (34 C.F.R. § 361.63(b)).

Program income does not include rebates, credits, discounts, and interest earned on
any of them (2 C.F.R. § 200.1).

In accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(3)(ii), “to the extent available, the non-
Federal entity must disburse funds available from program income (including
repayments to a revolving fund), rebates, refunds, contract settlements, audit
recoveries, and interest earned on such funds before requesting additional cash
payments.” SSA reimbursement program income received in the VR program and
transferred to an allowable program is considered disbursed for purposes of the VR
program.

• K. Reporting Period — The time period for which the recipient reports financial

information on any given report. For example, for purposes of the 4th quarter report,
the reporting period covers the period from October 1 through September 30.

• L. Unliquidated Financial Obligation — (See definition in 2 C.F.R. § 200.1)

Regardless of the accounting basis a recipient uses, a recipient must assign, track, and
report financial obligations made against Federal and non-Federal sources.

• M. Unobligated Balance — (See definition in 2 C.F.R. § 200.1)

III. Form Instructions

A. Grant Award Information

Federal Award Identification Number:
• • Data entry not required.

The recipient’s grant award number listed in Box 2 of the GAN is the default
entry.

4

Program income does not include rebates, credits, discounts, and interest earned on
any of them

---
Page 9

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Federal Fiscal Year:
• • Data entry not required.

The FFY of appropriation as listed in Box 2 of the GAN is the default entry.

Grant Period (From/To):
• • Data entry not required.

The Federal Funding Period in Box 6 of the GAN is the default entry. This data
element represents the period for which the funds were awarded

(34 C.F.R. § 77.1(c)). The Uniform Guidance uses the term “period of
performance” rather than “grant period.” Period of performance is defined in 2
C.F.R. § 200.1 in a manner like the EDGAR definition of “grant period.” A
recipient may neither obligate nor pay expenditures for costs of a grant award that
are incurred prior to the start of the period of performance. For example, the cost
for VR services provided to a consumer prior to the start of the period of
performance for a grant award may not be charged to that grant award. Rather,
those obligations must be charged to the prior grant award or another funding
source. Additionally, a recipient may not obligate award funds after the end of the
period of performance for a grant award but could make allowable accounting
adjustments to expenditures if permitted by State rules.

During the FFY of appropriation, the Federal Funding Period listed in Box 6 of
the GAN will be from October 1 to September 30 of that FFY. This represents the
one-year period for which the award is made and in which the recipient may incur
new obligations against the award. Section 19(a)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act
permits States to carry over Federal funds for obligation and expenditure in the

subsequent FFY provided certain conditions are met (see the Carryover Grant
Award Notification Attachment for additional details). This means that States
may carry over the matched portion of the unobligated balance of Federal funds
for one FFY beyond the FFY of appropriation so long as the conditions of Section
19 of the Rehabilitation Act were satisfied. For example, the FFY of appropriation
for FFY 2023 awards began on October 1, 2022, and ends on September 30, 2023.
The carryover period for FFY 2023 awards starts on October 1, 2023, and ends on
September 30, 2024.

Upon submission of the State’s 4th quarter RSA-17 report(s) (which is for the
reporting period ending September 30 of the FFY of appropriation), an RSA
Financial Management Specialist will review the report(s) to determine whether
the State met the requirements necessary to carry over funds for obligation and
liquidation in the subsequent FFY. If the State met the requirements of Section 19
of the Rehabilitation Act to carry over funds, RSA will process an administrative
change to the appropriate GAN(s) extending the period of performance to include

the carryover period.

5

---
Page 10

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Unless ED authorizes an extension for the carryover period consistent with the
requirements of Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act, a non-Federal entity must
liquidate all obligations incurred under the Federal award not later than 120
calendar days after the end date of the period of performance, as specified on the
GAN (2 C.F.R. § 200.344(c)).

Recipient Organization:
• • Data entry not required.

The organization’s name and address listed in Box 1 of the GAN is the default
entry.

Basis of Accounting:

Specify whether the recipient used a cash or accrual basis for recording Federal
and non-Federal grant award transactions that form the basis for the financial data
submitted on the RSA-17.

For cash basis accounting, expenses are recorded when they are paid. The
transaction remains at the obligation stage until the liability is eliminated by the
disbursement of cash (in other words, the liquidation of the obligation).
Accrued expenditures are recorded when goods or services are received,
regardless of when cash is received or paid. The accrual method of accounting
elevates an obligation to an expenditure once the liability to pay has been created,
as opposed to when the expenditure is actually paid.

A recipient must report expenditures using either a cash or accrual basis of
accounting (2 C.F.R. § 200.1). However, if a recipient changes from one basis of

accounting to another, the recipient must inform RSA of the change. To ensure
recipients are not utilizing separate bases of accounting for reports covering the
same period of performance, changes to a recipient’s basis of accounting should
coincide with the end of the period of performance for the grant award, thereby
ensuring consistency for the entire period of performance.

Reporting Period End Date:
• • Data entry not required.

The default reporting period end date corresponds with the end of the required
semi-annual reporting period. The period covered is always the beginning date of
the grant through the end of the reporting period. Therefore, the RSA-17 collects
cumulative data for the period of performance. An example is included in the
tables below:

6

---
Page 11

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Table 1: VR Award Does Not Qualify for Carryover
Reporting Period – FFY 2024 Reporting Period Report
Qtr.
Award End Date Type
Semi-
October 1, 2023 – March 31, 2024 March 31, 2024 2
Annual
April 1, 2024 – September 30, 2024 September 30,
4 Final
2024
Table 2: VR Award Qualifies for Carryover
Reporting Period – FFY 2024 Reporting Period Report
Qtr.
Award End Date Type
Semi-
October 1, 2023 – March 31, 2024 March 31, 2024 2
Annual
April 1, 2024 – September 30, 2024 September 30,
4 Annual
2024
Semi-
October 1, 2024 – March 31, 2025 March 31, 2025 6
Annual
April 1, 2025 – September 30, 2025 September 30,
8 Final
2025
These reports are only used if the State has met the requirements of Section 19
of the Rehabilitation Act necessary to carry over Federal funds for obligation and
expenditure in the succeeding FFY.
The RSA-17 reports must be submitted –
• • 30 calendar days after the end of the reporting period if the report is not the
final report; and
• • 120 calendar days after the end of the reporting period if the report is the final
report (2 C.F.R. § 200.329(c)(1)).
If RSA has approved a late liquidation request, the final RSA-17 report will be
due 30 calendar days after the end date of the approved liquidation period.

Final Report:

Select the Final Report box if the report being submitted is the recipient’s final
report for the period of performance. The recipient submits the final RSA-17
report for the reporting period in which the Reporting Period End Date (line 6) is
the same as the end of the period of performance.

Refer to the example table in the instructions for line 6 above.
• • For a recipient that 1) did not receive a carryover year or 2) has obligated all
its FFY 2024 Federal funds by September 30, 2024, the Reporting Period End
Date and the end of the period of performance would both occur on

7

Reporting Period – FFY 2024 Reporting Period Qtr. Report
Award End Date Type
| October 1, 2023 – March 31, 2024 | | | March 31, 2024 | | | 2 | Semi-
Annual | | |
| April 1, 2024 – September 30, 2024 | | | September 30,
2024 | | | 4 | Final | | |

Reporting Period – FFY 2024 Reporting Period Qtr. Report
Award End Date Type
| October 1, 2023 – March 31, 2024 | | | March 31, 2024 | | | 2 | Semi-
Annual | | |
| April 1, 2024 – September 30, 2024 | | | September 30,
2024 | | | 4 | Annual | | |
| October 1, 2024 – March 31, 2025 | | | March 31, 2025 | | | 6 | Semi-
Annual | | |
| April 1, 2025 – September 30, 2025 | | | September 30,
2025 | | | 8 | Final | | |

---
Page 12

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

September 30, 2024. In this case, the 4th quarter report for the period ending
September 30, 2024, would be the final report and is due 120 calendar days
after September 30, 2024.
• • For a recipient that receives a carryover year for the FFY 2024 grant award
and RSA extends the period of performance for that award, the Reporting
Period End Date and the end of the period of performance would both occur
on September 30, 2025. In this case, the FFY 2024 VR award 8th quarter
report, for the period ending September 30, 2025, would be the final report
and would be due January 28, 2026 – 120 calendar days after the end of the
period of performance for the FFY 2024 grant award (including the carryover
period).

Also see the definitions of “Financial Obligations” and “Period of Performance”
in the definitions section.

UEI Number:
• • Data entry not required.

The Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) is the official identifier for doing business
with the U.S. Government. The UEI associated with the Federal Award
Identification Number, line 1, in ED’s grant management system is the default
entry. This is the UEI listed in Box 8 of the GAN. The UEI number must be
active and currently registered in the System for Award Management (SAM)
(https://www.sam.gov). Entities registering in SAM.gov are assigned a UEI as
part of the registration process.

Recipient Account Number or Identifying Number:

• • Data entry optional.
• • Data entry limited to 30 characters.

Enter an account number or other identifying number from the statewide
accounting system, assigned by the recipient to the award. This number can be
used for grant management and is not required by ED or RSA.

B. Federal Funds

Total Federal Funds Awarded:
• • Data entry not required.

This data element represents the total amount of Federal funds awarded by ED to

the recipient for the specific FFY as of the end of the reporting period. The
amount listed may change due to award adjustments that could reflect funds
awarded by continuing resolutions, reductions for maintenance of effort shortfalls
required by statute, recipient-requested inter-agency transfers or deobligations,
and/or the receipt or relinquishment of Federal funds during the reallotment
process.

8

---
Page 13

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Federal Cash Receipts:

Enter the cumulative amount of Federal grant funds that the recipient has drawn
down and received from the amount awarded as listed above on line 10, Total
Federal Funds Awarded, per ED’s grants management system. This amount
(Federal cash receipts) is obtained by running a Grants Management System
• (GMS) External Award Activity Report (https://g6.ed.gov) using date parameters.
• • The date parameters entered in the GMS will be the start date of the award
and the reporting period end date.
• • For final reports, the date parameters entered in the GMS will be the start date

of the award and the date award funds were liquidated. Because a recipient
may draw down funds during the liquidation period or upon receipt of an
approved late liquidation request, the end date of the GMS External Award
Activity Report may be past the end of the period of performance of the
award. This does not change the reporting period end date on the form.

Recipients may want to maintain copies of the GMS External Award Activity
Reports as supporting documentation that verifies the accuracy of the amount
reported. Recipients should not include requests for drawdowns that were not
received during the reporting period.

Federal Cash Disbursements:

Enter the cumulative amount of actual disbursements made by the recipient from
the Federal VR funds drawn down and received during the reporting period from
line 11, Federal Cash Receipts. Disbursements are the sum of actual cash

expenditures made for direct charges for goods and services, the amount of
indirect expenses charged to the award, and the amount of payments made to
contractors/vendors.

Note: Unliquidated obligations are not included in this amount even if recipients
use accrual-based accounting.

Federal Cash on Hand (line 11 minus line 12):
• • Data entry not required.

If more than three business days of cash are on hand, recipients must provide an
explanation on line 42, Remarks, as to why the drawdown was made prematurely
or other reasons for the excess cash. Recipients must minimize the time elapsing
between drawdown of Federal funds and disbursement by the recipient in
accordance with Cash Management Improvement Act (CMIA) requirements and

ED guidance.

9

---
Page 14

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Federal Share of Expenditures:

Enter the total amount of expenditures incurred with Federal VR funds (also
known as Federal expenditures). Do not include expenditures incurred with
program income (e.g., program income received as SSA reimbursements for VR
services provided to SSA recipients and beneficiaries) received by the recipient on
this line. Such program income expenditures will be reported in Section C,
Federal Program Income.
• • For reports prepared on a cash basis, the recipient should report Federal fund
expenditures as the sum of cash disbursements for direct charges for goods
and services, the amount of indirect expenses charged, and the amount of
payments made to contractors/vendors.

• • For reports prepared on an accrual basis, recipients should report Federal fund
expenditures as the sum of cash disbursements for direct charges for goods
and services, the amount of indirect expenses incurred, the amount of
payments made to contractors/vendors, and the increase or decrease in the
amounts owed by the recipient for goods received and services performed by
employees, contractors/vendors, and other payees.

Recipients must include the total of all Federal VR fund expenditures incurred on
line 14, and must break out expenditures for certain categories, as described for
lines 15, 16 and 17. For example, recipients must report the amount expended on
pre-employment transition services (which is reported on line 14 as part of the
total of Federal Share of Expenditures) separately in line 15, Federal Expenditures
Incurred for the Provision of Pre-employment Transition Service Activities and
Certain Other VR Services Needed to Access or Benefit from Pre-Employment
Transition Services Provided.

Federal Expenditures Incurred for the Provision of Pre-employment Transition
Service Activities and Certain Other VR Services Needed to Access or Benefit
from Pre-Employment Transition Services Provided:

Expenditures reported in this section are only for activities charged to Federal
funds reserved for pre-employment transition services.

Report in this category all expenditures for pre-employment transition service
activities and certain other VR services needed by a student with a disability to
access or benefit from pre-employment transition services, which is also included
in the total amount of Federal funds reported on line 14, Federal Share of
Expenditures. Recipients are responsible for ensuring the tracking of time and
attendance includes the ability to positively track staff time spent providing the
“required,” “authorized,” and “coordination” pre-employment transition service
activities, respectively. Only in this manner, can a recipient ensure that it can

provide all “required” pre-employment transition services needed by students
with disabilities in the State and coordination activities, as described in Section
113(b) and (d), respectively, of the Rehabilitation Act, before providing other

10

---
Page 15

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

“authorized” pre-employment transition services permitted under Section 113(c)
of the Rehabilitation Act.

Include in this section only those expenditures incurred for services for which the
reserved funds may be used (i.e., required, authorized and coordination pre-
employment transition service activities) as well as other VR services necessary
to access or benefit from the required pre-employment transition services (see
Notice of Policy Interpretation (85 FR 11848 (Feb. 28, 2020)). A recipient may
use the reserved funds to pay for certain VR services that are needed by any
student with a disability to access pre-employment transition services (e.g.,
interpreter and reader services); however the recipient may use the reserved funds
to pay for other VR services that a student with a disability needs to benefit from
pre-employment transition services only if that student has been determined

eligible for the VR program and those other services have been identified on the
individualized plan for employment as necessary to participate in the pre-
employment transition services (Id.).

Do not include recipient administrative expenses related to rent, utilities,
supplies, etc., in this section because Section 110(d)(2) of the Rehabilitation Act
prohibits the recipient from using the reserved funds to pay for the administrative
costs it incurs in providing or arranging for the provision of pre-employment
transition services.

• a. Required and Coordination Pre-employment Transition Service Activities and
Other VR Services that Support Access to and Participation in Pre-Employment
Transition Services:

Enter the total amount of allowable Federal expenditures for required and
coordination pre-employment transition service activities and other VR

services that support access to and participation in pre-employment transition
services that were charged to the funds required to be reserved for pre-
employment transition services.

• b. Authorized Pre-employment Transition Service Activities:

Enter the total amount of Federal expenditures for the provision of authorized
pre-employment transition service activities charged to the funds required to be
reserved for pre-employment transition services. Do not include authorized pre-
employment transition service activities not charged to the funds reserved for
pre-employment transition services.

Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes:

Enter the Federal share of expenditures incurred for the establishment of facilities
for Community Rehabilitation Program (CRP) purposes, which was also included

in the total amount of Federal expenditures reported on line 14, Federal Share of

11

---
Page 16

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Expenditures. Include only those Federal expenditures on line 16 for activities
that would meet the definition of “establishment of a facility for a public or
nonprofit community rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(17). Do not
include expenditures for staffing or other costs associated with establishment
projects, such as those additional costs included in the definition of
“establishment, development, or improvement of a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16). If no funds were used for this
purpose during the reporting period, enter zero on this line.

Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes:

Enter the Federal share of expenditures incurred for the construction of facilities
for CRP purposes, which was also included in the total amount of Federal

expenditures reported on line 14, Federal Share of Expenditures. Only include
those expenditures, paid with Federal funds, for activities that would meet the
definition of “construction of a facility for a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(10). Do not include expenditures
for staffing or other costs associated with establishment projects, such as those
additional costs included in the definition of “establishment, development, or
improvement of a public or nonprofit community rehabilitation program” at
34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16). If no funds were used for this purpose during the
reporting period, enter zero on this line.

Federal Share of Unliquidated Obligations:

Enter the Federal portion of unliquidated obligations incurred by the recipient.
Unliquidated obligations include orders placed for property and services,
contracts, and similar transactions during a given period that require payment by
the recipient but have not yet been paid or charged to the VR grant award. These

include direct and indirect obligations for goods and services incurred by the
recipient, as well as amounts due to contractors/vendors. When submitting a final
RSA-17 report, this data element should be zero because all obligations must be
liquidated prior to the submission of the final financial reports and grant closure.

Do not include on line 18 –
• • Expenditures reported on line 12, Federal Cash Disbursements;
• • Expenditures reported on line 14, Federal Share of Expenditures; and
• • Future fund commitments for which an obligation or expense has not been
incurred during the reporting period, in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 76.707.

Recipients have 120 days from the end of the period of performance to liquidate
Federal obligations (2 C.F.R § 200.344(c)). If recipients are unable to liquidate all

obligations within the liquidation period, 120 days after the period of performance
ends, recipients must submit a late liquidation request in accordance with ED’s
guidance. If approved, the recipient must liquidate the approved obligations and

12

---
Page 17

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

submit the final report within 30 days after the approved late liquidation extension
date.

Requirements for obligations, located at 34 C.F.R. § 76.707 of EDGAR, identify
when obligations are made for Departmental awards. All recipients, regardless of
the basis of accounting used, must assign, track, and report unliquidated
obligations to RSA, based on their assignment to a Federal or non-Federal fund
source.

Total Federal Share (sum of lines 14 and 18):
• • Data entry not required.

Unobligated Balance of Federal Funds (line 10 minus line 19):
• • Data entry not required.

For the final report, this figure represents the amount of Federal VR funds
awarded that the recipient did not obligate or draw down.

C. Federal Program Income

Total Federal Program Income Received:

Enter the total amount of program income received by the recipient under the VR
program as of the end of the reporting period. All program income received by the
VR program is to be reported as Federal program income earned. This means
that recipients must report, and use, program income earned under the VR
program as an addition to the Federal grant funds received under the VR

program (34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(3)(i)). In other words, recipients may not use
program income to reduce the amount of the Federal VR award.

Program income is considered received in the FFY in which the recipient receives
the funds (34 C.F.R. § 361.63 and 2 C.F.R. § 200.1). Therefore, the amount
reported should not change after the recipient submits its 4th quarter report for the
FFY of appropriation in which the program income is received. Any program
income received during the subsequent FFY, even if the recipient is operating
under a carryover year from the prior FFY’s grant award, must be reported on the
RSA-17 for the next FFY’s grant award.

While all program income received by the recipient, including reimbursements
from the Social Security Administration (SSA), is entered on line 21, the
expenditure of program income is reported below on lines 22 through 26 as
appropriate. For example, if the VR program receives $100,000 in SSA payments
and expends those funds in the VR program, the recipient must include the

$100,000 on line 21 and then report the expenditure of those on line 22.

13

---
Page 18

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

A recipient may choose to transfer SSA payments received by the VR program to
certain formula grant programs funded under the Rehabilitation Act, as permitted
by Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2). The
authority to transfer program income received from SSA in accordance with
Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2) is unique only
to program income received from SSA. There is no legal authority for the
recipient to transfer other forms of program income earned under the VR
program to another program for that program’s use. Therefore, only SSA
reimbursement program income transferred to other eligible programs can be
reported on lines 23 through 26. Each program receiving SSA payments for its
use must report the funds as program income received for that program.

For example, if the VR program receives $100,000 in SSA payments, but

transfers the entire amount to the Independent Living for Older Individuals who
are Blind (OIB) program, the VR program must report the receipt of the $100,000
on line 21 and the expenditure of those funds under line 24 below. In so doing, the
VR program would report that the funds were “disbursed” by reporting the
transfer on line 24, SSA Payments Transferred to the Independent Living Services
for Older Individuals who are Blind Program. In addition, in this example, the
OIB program would report the program income on its SF-425 line 10l as received,
report the program income as transferred from the VR program in the Remarks
section on line 12, Remarks, on its own SF-425.

Program income from SSA payments transferred to other eligible programs is
restricted to the grant award year that corresponds to the FFY of appropriation in
which it was received in the VR program. For example, SSA payments received
in the VR program in FFY 2024 may be transferred to the OIB program for
expenditures and reporting purposes for its FFY 2024 OIB award. This means the
transfer may occur during the FFY 2024 grant year or, in rare circumstances and

when applicable, during the FFY 2024 carryover year of the OIB grant award,
which occurs in FFY 2025. In the rare event that the program income is expended
during the FFY 2024 carryover year (which occurs in FFY 2025), all program
income information must be reported as occurring during the FFY 2024 period of
performance, not the FFY 2025 grant award’s period of performance.

Program Income Expended in Accordance with the Addition Alternative:

Enter the amount of program income reported on line 21, Total Federal Program
Income Received, that was expended to supplement the Federal share of the total
expenditures of the VR program (in other words, in addition to the Federal VR
expenditures incurred). The amount reported represents actual disbursements
under the VR program and does not include any SSA payments transferred to
other eligible programs, reported in lines 23 through 26. The expenditure of all
program income funds must meet the same standards of allowability,
reasonableness, and allocability (2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through 200.405) that are

14

---
Page 19

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

applicable to Federal funds (Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(3), and 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.307(e)(2)).

SSA Payments Transferred to the State Independent Living Services (SILS)
Program:

Enter the amount of SSA program income reported on line 21, Total Program
Income Received under the VR program, but transferred from the VR program to
the SILS program, as permitted by Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2). The SILS program should consult with the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services regarding how transferred program
income received should be reported for its program on its financial reports.

SSA Payments Transferred to the Independent Living Services for Older
Individuals Who are Blind (OIB) Program:

Enter the amount of SSA program income reported on line 21, Total Program
Income Received under the VR program, but transferred by the VR program to
the OIB program, as permitted by Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2). This amount must also be reported as program income
earned on the corresponding SF-425 submitted by the OIB program. See the
instructions for line 21, Total Federal Program Income Received, for additional
information.

SSA Payments Transferred to the Client Assistance Program (CAP):

Enter the amount of SSA program income reported on line 21, Total Federal
Program Income Received under the VR program, but transferred by the VR
program to the CAP, as permitted by Section 108 of the Rehabilitation Act and

34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2). This amount must also be reported as program income
earned on the corresponding SF-425 submitted by the CAP. See the instructions
for line 21, Total Federal Program Income Received, for additional information.

SSA Payments Transferred to the State Supported Employment Services
(Supported Employment) Program:

Enter the amount of SSA program income reported on line 21, Total Federal
Program Income Received under the VR program, but transferred by the VR
program to the Supported Employment program, as permitted by Section 108 of
the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(2)). This amount must also be
reported as program income earned on the corresponding SF-425 submitted by the
Supported Employment program. See the instructions for line 21, Total Federal
Program Income Received for additional information.

15

---
Page 20

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Unexpended Program Income (line 21 minus lines 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26):
• • Data entry not required.

When submitting a final report, this line should be zero.

Note: In accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(3)(ii), “to the extent available,
the non-Federal entity must disburse funds available from program income
(including repayments to a revolving fund), rebates, refunds, contract settlements,
audit recoveries, and interest earned on such funds before requesting additional
cash payments.” This means recipients may not request a drawdown of Federal
funds from the GMS if there is an undisbursed balance of program income.
Program income received in the VR program and transferred to the account of an

allowable program is considered disbursed for purposes of the VR program and
this requirement.

D. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the FFY of Appropriation
(1st through 4th Quarter)

Overview: Information from this section is used to ensure the recipient provides the
requisite cost share of non-Federal expenditures incurred during the FFY of
appropriation. At the end of the 4th quarter, the recipient’s non-Federal share is based
upon the sum of lines 28, Total Non-Federal Share of Expenditures (4th Quarter) and
29, Non-Federal Share of Unliquidated Obligations (4th Quarter). In using this
calculation, RSA includes the recipient’s unliquidated non-Federal obligations with the
expenditures. As such, the recipient’s non-Federal share of unliquidated obligations is
credited toward meeting the recipient’s match requirement. The match calculated by
adding the amounts on lines 28 and 29, as just described, at the end of the FFY of
appropriation (i.e., at the end of the 4th quarter), determines whether the recipient has

preliminarily satisfied its match requirement for the grant award and, thus, is able to
carry Federal funds over to the subsequent fiscal year to the extent such funds remain
available for obligation. In Section E below, recipients report the amount of
liquidations from the amount of non-Federal unliquidated obligations incurred in the
FFY of appropriation, as reported on line 29, but liquidated during the carryover year,
which will be used to determine the actual match for the award based on final report
data.

Third-party in-kind contributions are not an allowable source of non-Federal share
under the VR program and, therefore, should not be reported as non-Federal
expenditures (34 C.F.R. § 361.60(b)(2)).

Total Non-Federal Share of Expenditures
(1st through 4th Quarter):

Enter the total amount of non-Federal VR expenditures incurred for the reporting

period. Do not include expenditures incurred with program income because such
expenditures cannot be used to meet the non-Federal share requirement

16

---
Page 21

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

(34 C.F.R. § 361.63(c)(4)). Do not include non-Federal unliquidated obligations,
as those will be reported on line 29.

Include on line 28 all non-Federal expenditures incurred under the VR program,
including those in excess of the amount required to satisfy the non-Federal share
• (match) requirement under the VR program (i.e., 21.3 percent of the State’s total
expenditures under the VR program) (34 C.F.R. § 361.60(a)(1) and (b)(1)).
Recipients must report on line 28 all non-Federal expenditures incurred under the
VR program, regardless of the source of funding, even if the amount reported
exceeds the amount of non-Federal share required to match the total Federal
funds awarded. This information is necessary for RSA to assess whether the State
has met its maintenance of effort requirement under Section 111(a)(2)(B) of the
Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.62.

This amount must include the non-Federal share of actual cash disbursements or
expenditures (less any non-Federal portion of rebates, refunds, or other applicable
credits assignable to the VR award), including payments to contractors, and any
expenses included in line 30, Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities
for CRP Purposes, and line 31, Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities
for CRP Purposes.

Note: This field is locked for editing after the 4th quarter.

Non-Federal Share of Unliquidated Obligations
(1st through 4th Quarter):

Enter the amount of unliquidated obligations to be paid with non-Federal funds
meeting the non-Federal share requirements in 34 C.F.R. § 361.60(b). Non-
Federal share can only be credited as match when obligated, in accordance with

34 C.F.R. § 76.707, in the FFY of appropriation for an award (i.e., October 1
through September 30). See line 32 for information about unliquidated obligations
counted as non-Federal share that are liquidated after the 4th quarter report for the
FFY of appropriation (i.e., in the carryover year). When the 4th quarter is marked
final, enter zero on line 29.

Non-Federal share expected from third-party cooperative arrangement (TPCA)
certified expenditures of public agency staff salaries, when the TPCA staff has not
yet completed the work, may not be included as an unliquidated obligation (or
expenditure) because these expenditures cannot be certified until after the staff
works and has been paid for the requisite number of hours. Pursuant to
34 C.F.R. § 76.707(b), an obligation for services performed by State agency
employees, including TPCA staff, is incurred at the time the work is performed.

17

---
Page 22

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes
(1st through 4th Quarter):

Enter the non-Federal share of expenditures, also included on line 28, Total Non-
Federal Share of Expenditures, incurred during the FFY of appropriation, for the
establishment of facilities for CRP purposes. Non-Federal expenditures for the
purpose of establishing a facility for a CRP will not be counted toward the State’s
maintenance of effort (34 C.F.R. § 361.62(b)); however, these non-Federal
expenditures count toward satisfying the State’s match requirement.

Do not include Federal funds used for this purpose. Only include those
expenditures, paid with non-Federal funds, for activities that would meet the
definition of “establishment of a facility for a public or nonprofit community

rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(17). Do not include the
expenditures reported on line 28 for staffing or other costs associated with
establishment projects, such as those additional costs included in the definition of
“establishment, development, or improvement of a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16); rather, such costs will be
reported on line 39a along with the expenditures reported here in line 30. If no
funds were used for purposes identified in 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(17) during the
reporting period, enter zero on this line.

Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes
(1st through 4th Quarter):

Enter the non-Federal share of expenditures, also included on line 28, Total Non-
Federal Share of Expenditures, incurred during the FFY of appropriation, for the
construction of facilities for CRP purposes. Non-Federal expenditures for the
purpose of constructing a facility for a CRP will not be counted toward the State’s

maintenance of effort (Section 101(a)(17)(C) and 34 C.F.R. § 361.62(b)).

Do not include Federal funds used for this purpose. Only include those
expenditures, paid with non-Federal funds, for activities that would meet the
definition of “construction of a facility for a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(10). Do not include the
expenditures reported on line 28 for staffing or other costs associated with
establishment projects, such as those additional costs included in the definition of
“establishment, development, or improvement of a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16); rather, such costs will be
reported on line 39a along with the expenditures reported here in line 31. If no
funds were used for purposes identified in 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(10) during the
reporting period, enter zero on this line.

18

---
Page 23

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

E. Reporting Non-Federal Share in the Carryover Year
(5th through 8th Quarter)

Overview: As noted in Section D above, all non-Federal expenditures and obligations
used for match purposes must be incurred during the FFY of appropriation. During the
carryover year, the recipient must liquidate all unliquidated obligations reported on line
29 as having been incurred by the end of the FFY of appropriation but not liquidated by
that time. All unliquidated obligations reported on line 29 for match purposes, incurred
prior to the end of the FFY of appropriation, must be liquidated by the end of the
liquidation period for that award (i.e., 120 calendar days after the end of the 8th quarter
(period of performance)). However, RSA recognizes unliquidated obligations
sometimes fall through during the carryover year and must be cancelled or deobligated.
When this occurs, the recipient can no longer count those obligations toward satisfying

its match requirement.

If non-Federal unliquidated obligations from the end of the 4th quarter, needed to
carryover funds, are cancelled, but the recipient had access to additional non-Federal
funds prior to end of the 4th quarter, then the recipient may adjust its accounting records
to reassign Federal expenditures paid prior to the end of the FFY of appropriation to
non-Federal funds to increase the amount of non-Federal share the recipient reported as
incurred by the end of the FFY of appropriation. The recipient has the flexibility during
the carryover year to make accounting adjustments with respect to expenditures
incurred prior to the end of the FFY of appropriation to ensure it continues to satisfy its
non-Federal share and/or maintenance of effort requirement. Such accounting
adjustments must be consistent with the State and recipient policies/procedures and
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). As a result, based on the Final
RSA-17 report, the actual total match provided by a recipient is the sum of lines 28,
Total Non-Federal Share of Expenditures (4th Quarter) and 32, Non-Federal
Expenditures for Unliquidated Obligations Reported on Line 29 - Liquidated After the
4th Quarter (8th Quarter). To be clear, the amount listed on line 32 only reflects the

liquidation in the carryover year of non-Federal obligations incurred prior to the end of
the FFY of appropriation. These are not new expenditures or obligations incurred
during the carryover year, which are reported below on line 33.

Non-Federal Expenditures for Unliquidated Obligations Reported on Line 29 -
Liquidated After the 4th Quarter (5th through 8th Quarter):
• • This line is only used when the FFY of appropriation 4th quarter report is not
submitted as the Final report. The State must have met the requirements of
Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act for carrying over funds to report an
amount on this line item. If the State did not qualify for carrying over Federal
funds because it did not satisfy the requirements of Section 19, the recipient
must mark its 4th quarter report final and the recipient has 120 days after the
end of the period of performance to liquidate all obligations unless a late
liquidation request has been approved by RSA. When the 4th quarter is marked

final under these circumstances, line 32 should remain blank.

19

---
Page 24

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

For recipients in States that met the requirements of Section 19 of the
Rehabilitation Act to carry over Federal funds, use line 32 to enter the amount of
liquidations from the amount of non-Federal unliquidated obligations reported on
line 29, Non-Federal Share of Unliquidated Obligations, of the recipient’s 4th
quarter RSA-17 report that were liquidated during a subsequent reporting period.
The amount reported on line 32 reflects only the non-Federal obligations that
were reported on line 29 as incurred on or prior to September 30 of the FFY of
appropriation, but which were not liquidated by that date; line 32 reflects the
amount of those reported unliquidated obligations that have been liquidated
during the carryover year. Recipients may not report new non-Federal
expenditures on line 32 (i.e., non-Federal expenditures incurred during the
carryover year should be reported on line 33). Non-Federal share can only be
counted as match when obligated by September 30 of the FFY of appropriation of

an award as indicated on line 29 of the recipient’s 4th quarter RSA-17 and
liquidated within 120 calendar days after the end of the period of performance for
that award.

Unliquidated obligations reported on the 4th quarter report (i.e., those that were
incurred during the FFY of appropriation) that are cancelled during the
carryover period, or otherwise not liquidated after the FFY of appropriation, may
not be used toward satisfying the match requirement for the FFY of appropriation
for that award because those obligations never came to fruition for the VR
program. This means, a recipient may not have access to its full Federal award for
obligation and use in the carryover year if there were no excess non-Federal
expenditures incurred prior to September 30 of the FFY of appropriation to cover
the loss of these unliquidated obligations that “fell through” in the carryover year.
Funds for obligations reported on line 29, Non-Federal Share of Unliquidated
Obligations, cancelled during the carryover period, may not be re-obligated or
liquidated for expenditures incurred during the carryover period and counted as

match for the period of performance for the award because, pursuant to Section 19
of the Rehabilitation Act, match must be satisfied by the end of the FFY of
appropriation in order to carry over funds to the subsequent year.

If non-Federal unliquidated obligations from the end of the 4th quarter, needed to
carryover funds, are cancelled, but the recipient had access to additional non-
Federal funds prior to end of the 4th quarter, then the recipient may adjust its
accounting records to reassign Federal expenditures paid prior to the end of the
FFY of appropriation to non-Federal funds to increase the amount of non-Federal
share the State reported as having incurred by the end of the FFY of
appropriation. This will result in a surplus of Federal cash on hand because
Federal funds previously used to pay for an expenditure have now been adjusted
to be paid with non-Federal funds. In this instance, the RSA-17 submitted by the
recipient for the 4th quarter of the FFY of appropriation must be revised to reflect
an increased non-Federal share of expenditures, line 28, and a decreased amount
of Federal expenditures, line 14. The recipient should ensure its internal controls

address how the excess cash on hand is managed to ensure compliance with the

20

---
Page 25

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Cash Management Improvement Act (CMIA) requirements and note in the
Remarks section (line 42) of the RSA-17 the reason for the excess Federal cash on
hand.

The recipient is responsible for ensuring that all RSA-17 data submitted,
including changes, are reflected in the State’s accounting system and consistent
with the State’s and recipient’s accounting policies/procedures and GAAP.
Accounting adjustments to expenditures incurred in a prior period (e.g., through
the 4th quarter) require the recipient to request a revision to the prior reporting
period submission that coincides with when the expenditure occurred.

Additional New Non-Federal Expenditures (5th through 8th Quarter):

For purposes of the VR program, a recipient must report all non-Federal
expenditures in the FFY in which those expenditures are incurred for purposes of
satisfying the maintenance of effort (MOE) requirement at Section 111(a)(2)(B)
of the Rehabilitation Act because MOE is determined on an FFY basis, not on the
basis of a period of performance for an entire grant award. Enter on line 33 the
amount, if any, of new non-Federal expenditures incurred during the carryover
year. The amount on line 33, if any, represents new expenditures and obligations
incurred during the carryover year, in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 76.707. The
amount reported on line 33 must not include the liquidation of obligations that
were incurred during the FFY of appropriation, and reported on line 29, then
liquidated during the carryover year and reported on line 32. The non-Federal
expenditures reported on line 33, if any, will not count toward the match
requirement of either the prior FFY year of appropriation or the current FFY, but
will count toward the current FFY’s MOE requirement.

Non-Federal Share for Establishment of Facilities for CRP Purposes
(5th through 8th Quarter):

Enter the non-Federal share of expenditures, also included on line 33, Additional
New Non-Federal Expenditures, incurred during the carryover year, for the
establishment of facilities for CRP purposes. Non-Federal expenditures for the
purpose of establishing a facility for a CRP will not be counted toward the State’s
maintenance of effort (34 C.F.R. § 361.62(b)).

Do not include Federal funds used for this purpose. Only include those
expenditures, paid with non-Federal funds, for activities that would meet the
definition of “establishment of a facility for a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(17). Do not include expenditures
for staffing or other costs associated with establishment projects, such as those
additional costs included in the definition of “establishment, development, or
improvement of a public or nonprofit community rehabilitation program” at
34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16); rather, such costs will be reported on line 39a along

with the expenditures reported here in line 34. If no funds were used for purposes

21

---
Page 26

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

identified in 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(17) during the reporting period, enter zero on
this line.

Non-Federal Share for Construction of Facilities for CRP Purposes
(5th through 8th Quarter):

Enter the non-Federal share of expenditures, also included on line 33, Additional
New Non-Federal Expenditures, incurred during the carryover year, for the
construction of facilities for CRP purposes. Non-Federal expenditures for the
purpose of constructing a facility for a CRP will not be counted toward the State’s
maintenance of effort (Section 101(a)(17)(C) and 34 C.F.R. § 361.62(b)).

Do not include Federal funds used for this purpose. Only include those

expenditures, paid with non-Federal funds, for activities that would meet the
definition of “construction of a facility for a public or nonprofit community
rehabilitation program” at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(10). Do not include expenditures
for staffing or other costs associated with establishment projects, such as those
additional costs included in the definition of “establishment, development, or
improvement of a public or nonprofit community rehabilitation program” at
34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16); rather, such costs will be reported on line 39a along
with the expenditures reported here in line 35. If no funds were used for purposes
identified in 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(10) during the reporting period, enter zero on
this line.

F. Indirect Expenses

Indirect costs (2 C.F.R. § 200.1) are generally charged to Federal awards via an
approved indirect cost rate or cost allocation plan. Any recipient that wishes to claim
indirect costs under Federal grants through an indirect cost rate must prepare an indirect

cost rate proposal (2 C.F.R. § 200.1) and submit it to the cognizant Federal agency for
indirect costs for approval (2 C.F.R. part 200, Appendix VII, paragraph D). Recipients
claiming indirect expenses based on a cost allocation plan (2 C.F.R. part 200, Appendix
VII, paragraph F.3), rather than an indirect cost rate, must develop, document, maintain
for audit, or submit, as appropriate, a narrative cost allocation methodology for indirect
costs to the cognizant agency for review, negotiation, and approval. Recipients must
ensure internal controls are adequate to report indirect costs timely and accurately.

Note: Indirect costs will be reported in Section F, line 36 and Section G, Administrative
Expenditures, line 37, as well as the applicable Federal, Program Income, and non-
Federal sections (B, C and D). Cost allocation plan costs will not be reported in Section
F, line 36, but will be reported in Section G, Administrative line 37, as well as the
applicable Federal, Program Income, and non-Federal sections (B, C and D). However,
RSA requires grantees with either cost allocation plans or indirect cost rates to identify
the Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs in line 36.

22

---
Page 27

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

Recipients with indirect cost rates that change between State fiscal years must use
separate rows for each approved indirect cost rate applicable to expenditures incurred
during the period of performance.

Federal Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs:

• • Enter the name of the Federal cognizant agency that approved the recipient’s
indirect cost rate.

• a. Type of Rate(s):

Select whether the approved indirect cost rate is the Department Temporary

Rate, De Minimis Rate, Provisional, Predetermined, Final, or Fixed rate. A
recipient that does not have an indirect cost rate agreement approved by its
cognizant agency for indirect costs, and that is using ED’s approved (beyond
the 90-day temporary period) temporary indirect cost rate of 10 percent of
budgeted direct salaries and wages, or the de minimis rate of 15 percent of
modified total direct cost (MTDC) must list its indirect cost rate as a
Department Temporary Rate or De Minimis Rate.

• b. Rate:

Enter the approved indirect cost rate(s) in effect during the reporting period as
a whole number (e.g., enter “8.5” if the approved rate is 8.5 percent, instead of
0.085).

• c. Period From:

Enter the beginning effective date(s) for the approved indirect cost rate(s).

• d. Period To:

Enter the ending date(s) for the approved indirect cost rate(s).

• e. Base:

Enter the amount of the base against which the approved indirect cost rate(s)
was applied. The base includes expenditures to which the approved indirect
cost rate may be applied.

• f. Amount Charged (line 36b multiplied by line 36e):
• • Data entry not required.

• g. Federal Share:

Enter the Federal share of the amount in 36f, Amount Charged.

23

---
Page 28

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

• h. Totals:
• • Data entry not required.

G. Select Federal and Non-Federal Expenditures (Include Expenditures Incurred
with Program Income — Do NOT Include Unliquidated Obligations)

The expenditures reported in this section are a subset of those in Sections B, C and D,
and will not reconcile to those data elements.

Administrative Expenditures:

Include on this line all expenditures incurred in the performance of administrative
functions under the VR program, including expenses related to program planning,
development, monitoring, evaluation, and infrastructure expenditures for the one-
stop service delivery system. See definition of “administrative costs,” for
purposes of the VR program, at 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(2). This should include both
direct and indirect administrative expenditures, regardless of whether
expenditures are charged in accordance with an approved indirect cost rate or cost
allocation plan. Include program income expenditures, but do not include any
unliquidated obligations. Examples include, but are not limited to expenditures for
–
• • Quality assurance;
• • Budgeting, accounting, financial management and information systems;
• • Providing program information to the public;

• • Technical assistance and support services to other State agencies, private
nonprofit organizations, and businesses and industries, except for technical
assistance and support services described in 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(4);
• • Innovation and Expansion (I&E) expenditures in support of the State
Rehabilitation Council Resource Plan and the State Independent Living
Council Resource Plan;
• • Professional organization membership dues for designated State unit
• (DSU) employees;
• • The removal of architectural barriers in State VR agency offices and State-
operated rehabilitation facilities;
• • Operating and maintaining DSU facilities, equipment, and grounds, as

well as the infrastructure of the one-stop system;
• • Supplies;
• • Administration of Comprehensive System of Personnel Development,
including personnel administration, training, and staff development;
• • Administrative salaries, including support staff;
• • Travel expenditures;
• • Conducting reviews of determinations made by personnel of the DSU; and
certain legal expenses (34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(2)).

24

---
Page 29

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

In addition, include personnel costs of regional, district and field office
supervisors who do not manage a participant caseload or perform the functions of
a VR counselor. Furthermore, report costs of field office rent, utilities, and
supply costs, etc., and any staff travel to carry out the program that is not
related to the provision of VR services (34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(2)(xii)).

Do not report in this line expenditures under services to groups of individuals
with disabilities (line 39), as such costs are not administrative costs.

Not Applicable

Services to Groups:

Enter the amount of Federal and non-Federal funds, including program income,
expended for each of the following services to groups of individuals with
disabilities in accordance with Section 103(b) of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.49.

• a. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of CRPs: (See description in
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(1))

This includes Federal and non-Federal costs for the establishment,
development, or improvement of a public or nonprofit CRP
(34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(16)); the establishment of a facility for a public or
nonprofit CRP (34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(17)); and the construction of a facility
for a public or nonprofit CRP (34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(10)).

• b. Telecommunication Systems: (See description in 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(2))

• c. Special Services to Provide Nonvisual Access to Information: (See description
in 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(3))

• d. Technical Assistance to Businesses: (See description in
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(4))

• e. Business Enterprise Program, including the Randolph-Sheppard program:
(See description in 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5))

Report the Federal and non-Federal expenditures, as well as Randolph-
Sheppard set-aside expenditures spent on allowable activities under 34 C.F.R.
§ 361.49(a)(5), including management and supervision services, purchase of
new or replacement equipment, and repair of equipment. Include Federal and
non-Federal expenditures spent on initial stocks and supplies (up to the first
six months) and initial operating expenses (up to the first six months).

25

---
Page 30

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

• f. Transition Consultation and Technical Assistance: (See description in
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(6))

• g. Transition Services to Youth and Students: (34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(7))

Section 103(b) of the Rehabilitation Act, as amended by the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) authorizes VR services provided for
the benefit of groups of individuals with disabilities, including transition
services for students and youth with disabilities, who may not have applied for
or been determined eligible for VR services. (Section 103(b)(7) of the
Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(7)). These specific transition
services are to benefit a group of students with disabilities or youth with
disabilities and are not individualized services directly related to an

individualized plan for employment (IPE) goal, which are reported in Section
B, line 15. Examples include group tours of universities and vocational
training programs, employer or business site visits to learn about career
opportunities, career fairs coordinated with workforce development and
employers to facilitate mock interviews and resume writing, and other general
services applicable to groups of students and youth with disabilities when
general in nature and not individualized services or directly related to an IPE.

These expenditures may not be charged to the funds reserved for the provision
of pre-employment transition services.

• h. Establishment, Development, or Improvement of Assistive Technology: (See
description in 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(8))

• i. Support for Advanced Training: (See description in 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(9))

American Job Center Infrastructure Expenditures:

Enter the total amount of Federal and Non-Federal funds disbursed for payment of
American Job Center (AJC)/one-stop center infrastructure expenditures. The
Federal share amount listed on line 40 is also included on line 14, which identifies
the total amount of all Federal expenditures incurred under the VR program for all
purposes, and line 37, Administrative Expenditures. Similarly, the non-Federal
share included in line 40 is included in line 28 or 33, in accordance with those
line-item instructions, which include the total amount of non-Federal expenditures
incurred under the VR program for all purposes, and line 37, Administrative
Expenditures.

Infrastructure expenditures for AJCs are defined as non-personnel costs that are
necessary for the general operation of the one-stop center, including: rental of the
facilities; utilities and maintenance; equipment (including assessment-related and
assistive technology for individuals with disabilities); and technology to facilitate

access to the one-stop center, including technology used for the center’s planning

26

---
Page 31

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

and outreach activities (WIOA Section 121(h)(4), 34 C.F.R. § 361.700). This list
is not exhaustive. For example, expenditures for the development and use of the
common identifier (i.e., AJC signage) and supplies, as defined in the Uniform
Guidance at 2 C.F.R. § 200.1, used to support the general operation of the one-
stop center, may be considered allowable infrastructure expenditures. It is
important to note that VR funds used to pay for the VR program’s proportional
share of the infrastructure costs of the AJCs are considered “administrative costs,”
as defined in 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(2)(viii), for purposes of the VR program.
Non-personnel expenditures include all expenditures that are not compensation
for personal services. For example, payments for technology-related services
performed by vendors or contractors are non-personnel expenditures and may be
identified as infrastructure expenditures if they are necessary for the general
operation of the one-stop center. Such expenditures may include service contracts

with vendors or contractors, equipment, and supplies. Do not include in line 40
any non-cash, third-party in-kind contributions, or additional costs including
career services and shared operating costs or shared services, including personnel
costs.

For additional information about infrastructure expenditures, refer to
TAC 17-03: Infrastructure Funding of the One-Stop Delivery System.

Innovation and Expansion (I&E) Expenditures:

Enter the total amount of Federal and non-Federal funds expended for the
development and implementation of innovative approaches to expand and
improve the provision of VR services to individuals with disabilities in
accordance with Section 101(a)(18) of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.35. If no funds were expended for this purpose, enter zero.

• a. I&E Expenditures Supporting State Rehabilitation Council Resource Plan:

Of the total amount of I&E expenditures reported on line 41, enter the amount
that was expended for I&E expenditures supporting the State Rehabilitation
Council resource plan (34 C.F.R. § 361.35(a)(2)).

• b. I&E Expenditures Supporting the State Independent Living Council Resource
Plan:

Of the total amount of I&E expenditures reported on line 41, enter the amount
that was expended for I&E expenditures supporting the State Independent
Living Council resource plan (34 C.F.R. § 361.35(a)(3)).

H. Remarks

Remarks:

27

---
Page 32

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

This section can be used, as needed, to clarify and explain amounts reported and
changes from amounts previously reported. If line 13, Federal Cash on Hand,
indicates more than three business days of cash are on hand, recipients must
provide an explanation as to why the drawdown was made prematurely or other
reasons for the excess cash.

I. Certification

By signing this report, I certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that the report is
true, complete, and accurate, and the expenditures, disbursements and cash receipts are
for the purposes and objectives set forth in the terms and conditions of the Federal
award. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or fraudulent information, or the omission
of any material fact, may subject me to criminal, civil or administrative penalties for

fraud, false statements, false claims or otherwise. (U.S. Code Title 18, Section 1001
and Title 31, Sections 3729-3730 and 3801-3812).

Full Legal Name of Certifying Official: 

Enter the full name of the certifying official that is legally authorized to submit
the form and attest to the certification above.

The certifying official must be an individual with the authority to attest to the
certification statement.

• a. Certifying Official Title:

Enter the official title of the certifying official that is legally authorized to submit
the form and attest to the certification above.

The certifying official must be an individual with the authority to attest to the
certification statement.

Telephone (Area code, number):

Enter the telephone number of the authorized certifying official.

• a. Telephone Extension (if any):

Email Address:

Enter the email address of the authorized certifying official.

Signature:

By checking this box and typing the full legal name of the certifying official
above, the individual submitting the report, if not the certifying official, is

28

By checking this box and typing the full legal name of the certifying official
above, the individual submitting the report, if not the certifying official, is

---
Page 33

RSA-17 OMB Control Number: 1820-0017

verifying that the certifying official has signed a physical copy of the form, and
the signed form is available upon request.

Date Report Submitted:
• • Data entry not required.

29

verifying that the certifying official has signed a physical copy of the form, and
the signed form is available upon request.