dear-director-letter-formal-interagency-agreements-between-state-vr-agencies-and-seas-07-15-2019

Dear Director:

To support States to enter into formal interagency agreements between State vocational
rehabilitation (VR) agencies and State educational agencies (SEAs) and to foster collaboration
between these agencies, the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Special Education and
Rehabilitative Services (OSERS), Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA), in
collaboration with the Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP), is providing you with a
review instrument for the formal interagency agreement between SEAs and VR agencies, as
required by Section 101(a)(11)(D) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended by Title IV of
the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA), and 34 C.F.R. § 361.22(b).

The Rehabilitation Act and its regulations require VR agencies to enter into formal interagency
agreements with SEAs describing how the entities will collaboratively plan and coordinate
transition services for students with disabilities needing those services. This formal interagency

agreement is an important foundational document that helps to ensure students with disabilities
experience a smooth transition from school to post-school activities. The Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) also requires that the SEAs and VR agencies plan and
coordinate transition services for students who receive special education services (Section
612(a)(12) of the IDEA and 34 C.F.R. § 300.154). VR agencies have the flexibility to include
local educational agencies (LEAs) as parties to the formal State interagency agreement, or to
execute formal interagency agreements with LEAs that are consistent with the State-level
agreement and address the required provisions of the formal interagency agreement.

OSERS hopes you find the attached review instrument helpful when developing and updating, as
applicable, the formal interagency agreement between VR agencies and SEAs regarding
workforce preparation activities and employment services. It offers strategies and resources to
increase collaboration between the State and local agencies under these two programs, as well as
program providers, so they may more effectively serve students and youth with disabilities.
OSERS supports SEAs, LEAs, and VR agencies as they use the flexibility afforded under the
IDEA and Rehabilitation Act to engage in innovative strategies, involving students and youth

with disabilities and their families, in the transition process as early as possible.

In addition to the attached review instrument, the National Technical Assistance Center on
Transition (NTACT) and Workforce Innovation Technical Assistance Center (WINTAC) have
jointly issued an Interagency Agreement Toolkit to provide technical assistance on the
development of the formal interagency agreement between the VR agencies and SEAs.

Additional resources include:

• • A Transition Guide to Postsecondary Education and Employment for Students and Youth
with Disabilities (Transition Guide). As a student approaches the time to leave high
school, it is important that preparations for adult life are well underway. The Transition
Guide, developed by the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Special Education and
Rehabilitative Services, is a resource for students and families to use during the transition
planning process and may assist with the identification of needs and available services.
This resource highlights educational opportunities, credentials, and employment

---
Page 2

strategies designed to assist students with disabilities while in school to prepare for a
meaningful postsecondary education and thriving career.

• • Workforce Innovation Technical Assistance Center. This resource is designed to provide
training and technical assistance to State VR agencies on the new statutory requirements
contained in the Rehabilitation Act. The WINTAC develops and provides training and
technical assistance to State VR agency staff and related rehabilitation professionals and
service providers to help them develop the skills and processes needed to meet the
requirements of the Rehabilitation Act. Resources developed specific to the development
of the SEA agreement include: WINTAC-NTACT Interagency Toolkit Guide (updated
July 10, 2017); Introduction to Formal interagency Agreement Toolkit; Discussion
Prompts – Interagency Agreement Local Level; Discussion Prompts – Interagency

Agreement State level; Rehabilitation Act and IDEA Regs for Interagency Agreement;
and Interagency Agreement language Examples. In addition, the WINTAC and NTACT
developed a WIOA Performance Indicators – IDEA Part B Transition Performance
Indicator Crosswalk for agencies to understand how performance indicators align, the
potential impact on shared student data, timelines and priorities, as well as how agencies
can support student outcomes and improve agency performance.

State VR agency staff may contact your RSA State Liaison with any questions.

Sincerely,

Carol L. Dobak
Acting Deputy Commissioner, delegated the authority to
perform the functions and duties of the Commissioner
Rehabilitation Services Administration

• The examples and resource materials contained in this document are provided for the user’s convenience. The
inclusion of these materials is not intended to reflect their importance, nor is it intended to endorse any views
expressed, or products or services offered. These materials may contain the views and recommendations of various
subject matter experts as well as hypertext links, contact addresses and websites to information created and
maintained by other public and private organizations. The opinions expressed in any of these materials do not
necessarily reflect the positions or policies of the U.S. Department of Education or the U.S. Department of Labor
(Departments). The Departments do not control or guarantee the accuracy, relevance, timeliness, or completeness of
any outside information included in these materials.

---
Page 3

Review Instrument – Formal Interagency Agreements (e.g., SEA Agreements)

Review Instrument for the formal interagency agreement between the State educational agency (SEA)
and vocational rehabilitation (VR) agency as required by Section 101(a)(11)(D) of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973, as amended by the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA), and 34 C.F.R. §
361.22(b).

Note the date(s) the current SEA agreement was signed _______ and executed _____.

If not executed, when is the anticipated date of execution? _____________

Does the agreement identify all parties included in the agreement and is it signed by the authorized
officials of all parties identified in the agreement? Yes No 

Is the agreement reviewed and updated on a regular cycle, if not annually? Yes No

Reviewers Comments:

Has the formal interagency agreement with the SEA been revised to be consistent with the
requirements in 34 C.F.R. § 361.22(b), including requirements related to the coordination and provision

of pre-employment transition services in 34 C.F.R. § 361.48(a)? Yes No
Review Requirements:

• • Consultation and Technical Assistance (34 C.F.R. §361.22(b)(1)):

Does the agreement provide for consultation and technical assistance, which may be provided
using alternative means for meeting participation (e.g., video conferences and conference calls),
to assist educational agencies in planning for the transition of students with disabilities from
school to post-school activities, including pre-employment transition services and other
vocational rehabilitation services? Yes__ No__

Considerations (To facilitate review, but do not have to respond to every question):

o How will the VR agency and SEA collaborate to provide consultation and technical

assistance to ensure providers of pre-employment transition services and transition
services understand their roles and responsibilities? Are strategies clearly identified?
o Does the agreement identify for whom the agency is providing consultation and
technical assistance (LEAs, not students and families)?
o What types of activities does the VR agency provide to the educational agency as
consultation and technical assistance (e.g., transition and career planning, community

resources and linkages to postsecondary education and employers)?
o Does the agreement describe the methods that the VR agency can use to provide
consultation and technical assistance to education officials including through alternative
means, such as conference calls and video conferences?

Reviewer’s comments:

1

---
Page 4

• • Transition Planning (34 C.F.R. § 361.22(b)(2)):
Does the agreement provide for transition planning by personnel of the designated State agency
and educational agency personnel for students with disabilities that facilitates the development

and implementation of their individualized education programs (IEPs) under section 614(d) of
the Individuals with Disabilities’ Education Act (IDEA)? Yes__ No_____

Considerations (To facilitate review, but do not have to respond to every question):

o How will education and VR work together in the facilitation and development of the IEP
and IPE? Are strategies clearly identified?
o How is VR’s role defined in the facilitation and development of the IEP?
o How are interagency planning, coordination and provision of pre-employment transition
services and IDEA services between VR and education described?
o Does the agreement address joint/cross-training opportunities? If so, describe the

opportunities planned and provided.
o Is there coordination with non-educational agencies for out-of-school youth?
o What age does transition planning begin in the State?
o What is the maximum IDEA age of exit for each State?

Reviewer’s comments:

• • Roles and Responsibilities (34 C.F.R. § 361.22(b)(3)):

Does the current agreement include the roles and responsibilities, including financial
responsibilities, of each agency, including provision for determining State lead agencies and
qualified personnel responsible for transition services and pre-employment transition services?
Yes___ No__

Considerations (To facilitate review, but do not have to respond to every question):

o What services are provided by each agency?
o Who pays for services identified?
o What criteria have been used to determine who is responsible to pay for a similar

service that both entities can provide under their respective laws (e.g., purpose of
services, customary services and eligibility)?
o Does the agreement specify the procedures to document the coordination between VR
agencies and educational agency personnel, as well as the receipt of services for those
youth age 24 and younger who are seeking subminimum wage tin accordance with

requirements under Section 511 of the Rehabilitation Act, as added by WIOA?
o Does the agreement include clearly articulated roles and responsibilities for the
provision of transition service and pre-employment transition services required prior to
a student seeking subminimum wage?

2

---
Page 5

o Does the agreement include language addressing the development of the IPE, in
coordination with the IEP, within 90 days of the student being determined eligible for
VR services?
o Does the agreement include the construction clause (34 C.F.R. § 361.22(c)) stating that
nothing under title I of the Rehabilitation Act shall be construed as reducing a LEA’s or

any other agency’s obligation under the IDEA to provide or pay for transition services
that are also considered special education or related services and that are necessary for
ensuring a free appropriate public education (FAPE) to children with disabilities?
o Is the purchase and use of assistive technology devices included in the agreement?

Reviewer’s comments:

• • Procedures for Outreach (34 C.F.R. § 361.22(b)(4)):
Does the current agreement include procedures for outreach to and identification of students
with disabilities who are in need of transition services and pre-employment transition services?
Yes No_
**Outreach should occur as early as possible during the transition planning process and must
include, at a minimum, a description of the purpose of the vocational rehabilitation program,

eligibility requirements, application procedures and scope of services that may be provided to
eligible individuals.

Considerations (To facilitate review, but do not have to respond to every question):

o How does the agency conduct outreach and for whom? Are strategies clearly identified,
including strategies for obtaining parental consent and sharing personally identifiable
information?
o Does outreach occur as early as possible?
o Does outreach describe:

• ▪ The purpose of the VR program;
• ▪ Eligibility requirements;
• ▪ Application procedures; and
• ▪ The scope of services that may be provided.
o Does outreach include attendance at IEP and transition planning meetings, career fairs,

back to school nights, group orientations, and transition fairs?
o Does outreach include the identification of all students with disabilities (those eligible
and potentially eligible for the VR program), in need of pre-employment transition
services?
o What is the process and who is responsible for making LEA referrals to VR for pre-

employment and transition services?

3

---
Page 6

o How do State and local policies promote interagency coordination and timely delivery of
transition services under IDEA and the Rehabilitation Act and the pre-employment
transition services under the Rehabilitation Act?
o What required elements must be addressed in agreements between LEAs and VR if
applicable?

o Does the State use local educational agency (LEA) agreements? If so, are these LEA
agreements consistent with the SEA agreement?
Reviewer’s Comments:

• • Coordination of Section 511 Documentation Requirements (34 C.F.R. § 361.5(b)(5)):

Does the current agreement identify the coordination necessary to satisfy documentation
requirements set forth in 34 C.F.R. Part 397 with regard to students and youth with disabilities
who are seeking subminimum wage employment?
Yes No_

Considerations (To facilitate review, but do not have to respond to every question):
o Does the agreement describe how the VR agency, in consultation with the SEA will
develop a process, or utilize an existing process, to document the completion of the
required activities under Section 511 of the Rehabilitation Act, as amended, for youth
who are age 24 or younger and seeking subminimum wage employment including:
• ▪ Services provided by the VR agency, including pre-employment transition

services and career counseling, and information and referral; and
• ▪ Transition services provided by a LEA under IDEA.
o What is the process for the LEA to provide the VR agency with documentation of the
completion of transition services or pre-employment transition services for students
with disabilities?

o What is the process for the VR agency to provide documentation of the provision of the
above services within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed 435 days after the
completion of the services, or 90 days if a longer period of time is needed due to
extenuating circumstances?
Reviewer’s Comments:

• • Subminimum Wage Assurance (34 C.F.R. 361.22(b)(6)):
Does the current agreement include an assurance that, in accordance with 34 C.F.R § 397.31,
neither the State educational agency nor the local educational agency will enter into contract or
other arrangement with an entity, as defined in 34 C.F.R. § 397.5(d), for the purpose of

operating a program under which a youth with a disability is engaged in work compensated at a
subminimum wage.
Yes No_____
Reviewer’s Comments:

4