FAQ-24-02

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
August 14, 2024
FAQ 24-02

Frequently Asked Questions

Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) Core Program1 Performance Accountability
Assessment for Program Year (PY) 2023

Consistent with Joint WIOA Final Rule requirements,2 the U.S. Departments of Labor and
Education (the Departments) have determined it is appropriate and reasonable in PY 2023 for
the:
• • U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) to assess performance for four performance indicators
under the WIOA title I core programs and for three performance indicators under the
Employment Service (referred to as “WIOA title III”) core program;
• • U.S. Department of Education (ED) to assess performance for four performance
indicators under the Vocational Rehabilitation (referred to as “WIOA title IV”) core
program; and
• • Departments to delay assessing performance for the purpose of imposing sanctions for

the WIOA title II core program and for the remaining performance indicators in the
WIOA titles I, III, and IV core programs to provide for the orderly transition from the
requirements of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (WIA) to those of WIOA, as
permitted under section 503(a) of WIOA.

The Departments’ determinations, as will be described more fully herein, are consistent with the
phased-in approach to performance assessments described in Negotiations and Sanctions
Guidance for WIOA Core Programs (TAC-20-02), reissued on May 10, 2023.3

Summary

The Departments have determined it is appropriate and reasonable to assess performance for the
WIOA title I, III, and IV core programs for PY 2023 for the following performance indicators as
applicable:
• • Employment Rate 2nd Quarter after Exit;4

• • Median Earnings 2nd Quarter after Exit;

1 These six core programs are the Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth programs, authorized under WIOA title I
and administered by the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL); the Adult Education and Family Literacy Act (AEFLA)
program, authorized under WIOA title II and administered by the U.S. Department of Education (ED); the
Employment Service program authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act, as amended by WIOA title III and
administered by DOL; and the Vocational Rehabilitation (VR) program authorized under title I of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973, as amended by WIOA title IV and administered by ED.
2 See 20 C.F.R. § 677.190(c) and 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.190(c) and 463.190(c).
3 This guidance is a statement of the Departments’ policy regarding WIOA. Other than statutory and regulatory
requirements included in this document, the contents of this guidance do not have the force and effect of law. This
document is intended only to provide clarity regarding existing requirements under the applicable law or agency
policies.
4 This indicator also includes those who entered into a training or education program for the WIOA Youth program.

---
Page 2

• • Employment Rate 4th Quarter after Exit4; and
• • Credential Attainment Rate.

The Departments have determined that the available baseline data are not sufficient to produce
reliable estimates using the required statistical adjustment model for the remaining performance
indicators. Therefore, the Departments have determined it is necessary to continue to use their

transition authority, pursuant to section 503(a) of WIOA, to delay assessment of:
• • Measurable Skill Gains Rate for the WIOA titles I and IV core programs;
• • All performance indicators for the WIOA title II core program;5
• • The Overall State Indicator Scores for all core programs;6 and
• • The Overall State Program Scores for the WIOA titles I, II, and IV programs.7

This means the Departments will not assess performance for the purpose of imposing sanctions
for the above performance indicators and scores for PY 2023 but will continue to use
performance data for effective program management, oversight, monitoring, and continuous
improvement for these particular performance indicators. In addition to those performance
indicators that will be used to assess state performance because sufficient baseline data are
available to produce reliable estimates using the required statistical adjustment model, the

Departments will publish non-binding state performance results for those performance indicators
where state assessments cannot reliably be made. These preliminary state performance results
will ensure transparency in the performance accountability process and will provide a basis for
technical assistance and program oversight.

States are required to submit timely and complete annual performance reports for PY 2023 and
will be sanctioned for failure to do so.8 If a state is unable to submit complete and timely annual
performance reports by October 1, 2024, due to exceptional circumstances outside of the state’s
control, it must notify the Departments pursuant to 20 C.F.R. § 677.185(c) and 34 C.F.R. §§
361.185(c) and 463.185(c) and consistent with guidance set forth in TAC-20-02. The practical
implications of the Departments’ decision on sanctions implementation are explained in a series
of questions and answers below.

With respect to the title II core program, states report aggregate data annually, resulting in four
times less data than is generated each year for the titles I, III, and IV core programs for use in the
statistical adjustment model. As a result, it is taking more time for the title II model to yield
reliable estimates for purposes of measuring program performance; however, with each

additional year’s worth of data, the Departments have observed improvement in the model’s
ability to produce reliable estimates. This continued and steady improvement constitutes progress
toward the Departments’ ability to assess all performance indicators for all core programs. In the
meantime, the Departments have determined it is necessary to continue to use the transition
authority in section 503(a) of WIOA to provide for the orderly transition to the WIOA
performance accountability requirements for all core programs.

5 See below on page 2 for explanation regarding title II data.
6 The overall State indicator score for all programs for any given performance indicator cannot be calculated until
the Departments have sufficient baseline data to assess for performance for all applicable WIOA core programs with
respect to that performance indicator.
7 The Departments cannot assess for performance for the overall State program score for the WIOA I, II, or IV core
programs until the Departments have sufficient baseline data to yield reliable results for all performance indicators
applicable to the core program to be assessed.
8 See 20 C.F.R. § 677.185(a) and 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.185(a) and 463.185(a).

---
Page 3

Background

Section 116 of WIOA establishes primary performance indicators that apply to the six core
programs and reporting requirements that assess states’ effectiveness in achieving positive
outcomes for individuals and employers served by WIOA’s six core programs.9 WIOA also
requires that the Departments use a statistical adjustment model to assess state performance by
adjusting negotiated performance levels for the characteristics of participants actually served
throughout the PY and for the actual economic conditions within the state. WIOA requires the
Departments to use the model to assess state performance and determine whether a state has met

its adjusted levels of performance. The Departments developed a model and process for this
purpose.10 To date, the implementation of a model and the performance accountability
requirements have informed the Departments’ performance negotiations with states, helped to
prioritize technical assistance efforts, and advanced the workforce system toward a more
objective and data-driven accountability structure.

WIOA instituted a new approach to performance accountability in the workforce system, and the
Departments find it is taking longer to collect sufficient baseline data to produce reliable
estimates from the statistical adjustment model for certain performance indicators and for certain
core programs than had been anticipated. The Departments remain focused and committed to
collecting performance data and promoting robust practices related to data collection, data
integrity, complete reporting, and using data to improve programs and strengthen outcomes. As
additional data are collected, the Departments will continue to review and refine the statistical
adjustment model.

Section 503(a) of WIOA authorizes the Secretaries of Education and Labor to take such action as

appropriate to provide for the orderly transition from any requirement under WIA to those under
WIOA, including those related to the performance accountability system established in section
116 of WIOA. The Departments have determined that it would be inappropriate to assess for
performance pursuant to section 116(b)(3)(A) of WIOA and 20 C.F.R. § 677.190, and 34 C.F.R.
§§ 361.190 and 463.190, and to impose sanctions pursuant to section 116(f) of WIOA, on a state
on the basis of a statistical adjustment model for which the available baseline data are not
sufficient to produce reliable estimates.

Use of WIOA’s transition authority to delay assessing performance and imposing sanctions is an
appropriate action for an orderly transition to the WIOA performance accountability system,
because of the performance accountability system’s reliance, as required by statute, on the
statistical adjustment model. Therefore, the Departments determined that it is necessary to
continue to use the transition authority in section 503(a) of WIOA to delay assessing
performance and imposing sanctions against states that fail to meet adjusted levels of
performance for those Individual Indicator Scores, as well as for the Overall State Program
Scores and the Overall State Indicator Scores, for which the baseline or historical data are not

sufficient. For more information on the Departments’ determination, please review Attachment
II.

9 As stated in 20 C.F.R. § 677.150(d) and 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.150(d) and 463.150(d), the negotiations and sanctions
process only applies to states as defined in sec. 3(56) of WIOA – each of the several states of the United States, the
District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. It does not apply to the outlying areas as defined in
WIOA sec. 3(45)—American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the U.S. Virgin
Islands, and the Republic of Palau.
10 TAC-20-02: Negotiations and Sanctions Guidance for the WIOA Core Programs, available at
https://rsa.ed.gov/sites/default/files/subregulatory/RSA-TAC-20-02_0.pdf

---
Page 4

However, the Departments have determined there are sufficient baseline data for the statistical
adjustment model to yield consistently reliable results for most of the performance indicators for
the WIOA titles I, III, and IV core programs. Therefore, the Departments have determined it is
appropriate for DOL and ED to continue assessing performance for those performance indicators
for PY 2023 in accordance with joint WIOA regulations and the phased-in approach to
performance assessments described in TAC-20-02. The Departments, as permitted under section
503(a) of WIOA and described above, will continue to delay assessing performance for the
purpose of imposing sanctions for the remaining performance indicators. The following

questions and answers explain what this means in practical terms.

Questions and Answers

Q1: For which primary indicators of performance and for which core programs will the
Departments assess state performance for PY 2023?

DOL and ED will assess state performance for the following Individual Indicator Scores for the
WIOA titles I and IV core programs:
• • Employment Rate 2nd Quarter after Exit;
• • Median Earnings 2nd Quarter after Exit;
• • Employment Rate 4th Quarter after Exit; and
• • Credential Attainment Rate.

DOL will assess state performance for the following Individual Indicator Scores for the WIOA
title III core program:
• • Employment Rate 2nd Quarter after Exit;
• • Median Earnings 2nd Quarter after Exit; and
• • Employment Rate 4th Quarter after Exit.11

DOL will also assess state performance for the Overall State Program Score for the WIOA title
III core program since DOL will be assessing all of the Individual Indicator Scores applicable to
that program. See Attachments I and II for additional information.

For the WIOA title II core program, ED will not assess performance for the purpose of imposing

sanctions for the performance indicators for PY 2023 but will continue to use performance data
for effective program management, oversight, monitoring, and continuous improvement.

Q2: What happens if a state has a performance failure with respect to WIOA titles I, III,
and IV core program Individual Indicator Scores and the WIOA title III core program
Overall State Program Score for PY 2023?

If a WIOA title I, III, or IV core program, for the first time, fails to achieve an Individual
Indicator Score of at least 50%, as described in TAC-20-02, for the Employment Rate 2nd
Quarter after Exit, Median Earnings 2nd Quarter after Exit, Employment Rate 4th Quarter after

11 The Credential Attainment Rate and Measurable Skill Gains performance indicators are not applicable to the
WIOA Title III core program, pursuant to section 116(b)(2)(A)(i).

---
Page 5

Exit, or Credential Attainment Rate indicators in PY 2023, as applicable,12 the state must receive
technical assistance and develop a performance improvement plan in accordance with section
116(f)(1)(A) of WIOA. If the state fails the same Individual Indicator Score for the same
program, for the second consecutive time in PY 2023 or PY 2024, the Departments must impose
a financial sanction in accordance with section 116(f)(1)(B) of WIOA.

Similarly, if a WIOA title III core program, for the first time, fails to achieve an Overall State
Program Score of at least 90 percent in PY 2023, as described in TAC-20-02, the Departments
must provide technical assistance to the state and develop a performance improvement plan in

accordance with section 116(f)(1)(A) of WIOA. If a state WIOA title III core program fails to
achieve an Overall State Program Score of 90 percent, for the second consecutive time in PY
2023 or PY 2024, the Departments must impose a financial sanction in accordance with section
116(f)(1)(B) of WIOA.

Q3: Will the Departments suspend or delay WIOA performance reporting requirements
for PY 2023?

No, states must submit complete and timely required performance reports as they have done
since PY 2016 in accordance with section 116 of WIOA.

Q4: Will states be subject to sanctions for failure to submit complete and timely reports for
PY 2023?

Yes, states are subject to sanctions for failure to submit complete and timely performance reports
for all six core programs for PY 2023, as has been true since PY 2017. Failing to submit, as

applicable for the WIOA core program, complete PY 2023 annual performance reports by
October 1, 2024, could lead to a financial sanction through a reduction of a state’s PY 2024
Governor’s Reserve funds.13 For details regarding complete and timely reporting and requesting
an annual reporting extension, refer to TAC-20-02.

Q5: If the Departments are not using the data to assess performance for sanctions
purposes, how will the Departments use performance data from PY 2023?

The Departments will continue to use the data for the purposes of effective program
management, system oversight, monitoring and internal controls, and the provision of technical
assistance, including implementing methods for ensuring data reliability, as appropriate. The
Departments will share performance results with states, as appropriate. States should expect to
review performance data for PY 2023 and prepare to engage with Federal staff to discuss, among
other topics, data quality, continuous improvement, and performance results. All data reported by
states, even those not used for performance assessment in a particular PY, benefit the statistical
adjustment model used by the Departments by increasing the amount of data input, thereby

enabling the model to produce more reliable results over time.

12 These four performance indicators are those for which the Departments will assess for performance, as applicable,
for the title I, III, and IV WIOA core programs for PY 2023. As noted previously, the credential attainment rate
indicator is not applicable to the WIOA title III core program.
13 This refers to the percentage of a state’s WIOA title I allotment that the state’s Governor is allowed to reserve for
statewide activities under sec. 128(a) of WIOA (29 U.S.C. § 3163(a)).

---
Page 6

Q6: Does the Departments’ decision regarding assessing for performance for PY 2023
apply to subsequent PYs?

No, the Departments’ decision to assess state performance for certain performance indicators and
overall scores based on the reliability of the statistical adjustment model applies to PY 2023
only. The Departments’ decision for PY 2023 is based on a determination that sufficient baseline
data are available to produce reliable estimates using the statistical adjustment model for the
indicators that will be assessed for performance for that PY only. In an effort to accelerate the
full implementation of WIOA performance accountability requirements, the Departments will

make a separate assessment of the model’s reliability for PY 2024, rather than making a
determination to delay assessments for both program years (i.e., PYs 2023 and 2024) at this time.
The Departments are therefore advancing performance assessment consistent with the reliability
of the data yielded by the statistical adjustment model. For those indicators for which assessment
is delayed in PY 2023, the Departments will make a new determination for PY 2024 with the
benefit of another year’s worth of data input for the model.

Q7: Will the Departments assess state Effectiveness in Serving Employers (ESE)
performance for PY 2023?

No. On February 23, 2024, the Departments published the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act Effectiveness in Serving Employers Performance Indicator final rule at 89 FR
Therefore, because the indicator was just finalized, there are not yet available at least 2
years of complete data for it. In accordance with 20 CFR 677.190 (c)(2) and 34 C.F.R. §§
361.190(c)(2) and 463.190(c)(2), the Departments will collect and monitor state ESE
performance results through at least PY 2025 to establish a credible baseline and provide

technical assistance. After PY 2025 data are collected the Departments will develop a statistical
adjustment model for ESE in accordance with section 116(b)(3)(A)(v)(II) of WIOA. The
Departments will then notify the states of the model estimates’ reliability and the Departments’
ability to use the model for the purposes of accurate and objective state performance
assessments.

---
Page 7

Attachment I: Individual Indicator Scores and Overall State Program Score Subject to
Performance Assessment in PY 2023

Primary Title I Title I Title I Title II Title III Title IV Overall
Indicator/ Adult Dislocated Youth AEFLA Wagner- Vocational State
Core Worker Peyser Rehabilitation Indicator
Program Score
Employment Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No

Rate 2nd Qtr
after Exit4
Employment Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No
Rate 4th Qtr
after Exit4
Median Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No
Earnings 2nd
Qtr after Exit
Credential Yes Yes Yes No N/A Yes No
Attainment
Rate
Measurable No No No No N/A No No
Skill Gains

Rate
Effectiveness N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Baseline14
in Serving
Employers
Overall No No No No Yes No -
State
Program
Score

14

14 The ESE indicator is a shared statewide measure and is not assessed for each individual program. The ESE
indicator was finalized in February 2024. Therefore, in accordance with 20 C.F.R. § 677.190(c)(2) and 34 C.F.R. §§
361.190(c)(2) and 463.190(c)(2), the Departments will collect and monitor state ESE performance results through at
least PY 2025 to establish a credible baseline and provide technical assistance prior to assessing state ESE
performance.

| Primary
Indicator/
Core
Program | Title I
Adult | Title I
Dislocated
Worker | Title I
Youth | Title II
AEFLA | Title III
Wagner-
Peyser | Title IV
Vocational
Rehabilitation | Overall
State
Indicator
Score |
| Employment
Rate 2nd Qtr
after Exit4 | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | Yes | Yes | No |
| Employment
Rate 4th Qtr
after Exit4 | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | Yes | Yes | No |
| Median
Earnings 2nd
Qtr after Exit | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | Yes | Yes | No |
| Credential
Attainment
Rate | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | N/A | Yes | No |
| Measurable
Skill Gains
Rate | No | No | No | No | N/A | No | No |
| Effectiveness
in Serving
Employers | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | Baseline14 |
| Overall
State
Program
Score | No | No | No | No | Yes | No | - |

---
Page 8

Attachment II: Use of Transition Authority

Use of WIOA Transition Authority for Individual Indicator Scores

For purposes of the WIOA titles I and IV core programs (the Adult, Dislocated Worker, Youth,
and Vocational Rehabilitation programs), the Departments have determined that the statistical
adjustment model is yielding reliable results for the following performance indicators for
purposes of assessing the Individual Indicator Score, pursuant to 20 C.F.R. § 677.190(c)(5) and
34 C.F.R. §§ 361.190(c)(5):

• • Employment Rate 2nd Quarter after Exit;
• • Median Earnings 2nd Quarter after Exit;
• • Employment Rate 4th Quarter after Exit; and
• • Credential Attainment Rate.

For purposes of the Wagner-Peyser Act Employment Service program (referred to as “WIOA
title III”), the Departments have determined that the statistical adjustment model is yielding
reliable results for the following performance indicators for purposes of assessing the Individual
Indicator Score, pursuant to 20 C.F.R. § 677.190(c)(5):
• • Employment Rate 2nd Quarter after Exit;
• • Median Earnings 2nd Quarter after Exit; and

• • Employment Rate 4th Quarter after Exit.15

Therefore, the Departments have determined there is no need to use the transition authority of
section 503(a) of WIOA for purposes of delaying assessing the Individual Indicator Score for
these four indicators for the WIOA titles I and IV core programs and these three indicators for
the WIOA title III core program.

However, the Departments have determined that the baseline data, which includes economic
variables required by the statute, for the other indicators and core programs are not sufficient for
the statistical adjustment model to yield consistently reliable results. Therefore, the Departments
have determined it necessary to continue to apply the transition authority in section 503(a) of
WIOA in PY 2023 to delay assessing performance and imposing sanctions for:
• • Measurable Skill Gains Rate for the WIOA titles I and IV core programs, pursuant to 20

C.F.R. § 677.190(c)(5) and 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.190(c)(5); and
• • All performance indicators for the WIOA title II AEFLA core program, pursuant to 34
C.F.R. § 463.190(c)(5).

Section 116 of WIOA requires that the Departments use the same participant characteristics and
economic conditions in the statistical adjustment model for all primary indicators of
performance. This requirement has proved challenging, especially in the case of the Measurable
Skill Gains Rate, where there is little empirical evidence that the economic conditions within the
state have a meaningful effect on state performance. Nevertheless, with each PY’s worth of data
added to the statistical adjustment model, its ability to produce reliable estimates has improved
considerably. Despite the challenges faced by the Departments with respect to the Measurable
Skill Gains Rate indicator for the titles I, II, and IV core programs to date, the Departments are

15 Pursuant to section 116(b)(2)(A)(i) of WIOA, the Credential Attainment Rate and Measurable Skill Gains Rate
indicators are not applicable to the Wagner-Peyser program.

---
Page 9

increasingly confident the model will produce reliable estimates for this indicator for most
applicable programs in PY 2024.

Use of WIOA Transition Authority for Overall State Indicator Score and Overall Program
Score

While the model is yielding reliable results for certain performance indicators for the WIOA
titles I, III, and IV core programs, the Departments have concluded it would not be reasonable to
assess an Overall State Indicator Score, as required by 20 C.F.R. § 677.190(c)(3) and 34 C.F.R. §

361.190(c)(3), because such a score would not be an accurate representation of the state’s overall
performance across all core programs on any of the indicators.

Similarly, the Departments have determined it would not be reasonable to assess an Overall State
Program Score by considering only four performance indicators for which there are reliable data
for the WIOA titles I and IV core programs (20 C.F.R. § 677.190(c)(1) and 34 C.F.R. §
361.190(c)(1)). The Departments have determined that it would be reasonable to assess an
Overall State Program Score for the WIOA title III core programs because such a score accounts
for all the Individual Indicator Scores applicable to this program, as required by 20 C.F.R. §
677.190(c)(2).

Therefore, the Departments have determined it necessary to use the transition authority in section
503(a) of WIOA to delay assessing performance for Overall State Indicator Scores and Overall
State Program Scores, with the exception of the WIOA title III core program’s Overall State
Program score, and for imposing sanctions for any state that fails in accordance with 20 C.F.R. §
677.190(d)(1) and 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.190(d)(1) and 463.190(d)(1), for PY 2023.