rsa-faq-vr-aivrs-rs-programs-covid-19-05-14-2020_0

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES

May 14, 2020

The Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA), within the U.S. Department of Education’s

• (Department) Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, issues this Questions and
Answers document in response to inquiries concerning the administration of the State Vocational
Rehabilitation (VR) Services, American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services (AIVRS), and
Randolph-Sheppard programs as grantees seek to provide continuity of operations for individuals
with disabilities in the current COVID-19 environment.

To review other Questions and Answers that RSA has provided related to COVID-19, please
visit rsa.ed.gov. VR agencies should contact their RSA State Liaison with additional questions.
Additional information specific to the COVID-19 pandemic may be found online at
https://www.ed.gov/coronavirus.

VR Process

Q1. How can VR agencies manage referrals and applications for VR services during the
COVID-19 pandemic?

Processing Referrals

VR agencies may amend their standards for processing referrals to meet the needs of individuals
with disabilities in a timely manner while also addressing available staff capacity, although the
expectation is that VR agencies will not unduly delay the processing of referrals of individuals with
disabilities to their VR programs. The amended standards should be maintained by the VR agency

The VR regulations at 34 C.F.R. § 361.41(a) require VR agencies to develop and implement
standards for the “prompt and equitable handling” of referrals of individuals with disabilities to
the VR program. While there are no specific Federal timelines for processing referrals, the
standards for referrals must include timelines for making good faith efforts to inform the
individuals of application requirements and for gathering the necessary information to initiate
assessments for determining eligibility and priority in the State’s order of selection, if applicable.

Application Procedures

Once a referral has been made, consistent with 34 C.F.R. § 361.41(b)(2), individuals with
disabilities may request VR services in a variety of ways, such as—

• • By completing and signing a VR agency’s application form in writing or online;

• • By completing a common intake application form at a one-stop center or online
requesting VR services; or
• • By otherwise requesting services from the VR agency, such as by telephone, email, or
letter to the VR agency.

400 MARYLAND AVE. S.W., WASHINGTON, DC 20202-2600
www.ed.gov
The Department of Education’s mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness
by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.

---
Page 2

There is no requirement that applications be submitted in writing or that they be signed; once an
application is received, the VR agency would then document how the request was received.

Q2. How may VR agencies address signature requirements and adhere to the time
frames for eligibility determinations and development of individualized plans for
employment (IPE) given the challenges associated with agency operations during the
COVID-19 pandemic?

Extensions for Eligibility Determinations and IPE Development

VR agencies may extend the 60-day timeline for determining the eligibility of applicants for VR
services when there are exceptional and uncontrollable circumstances beyond the control of the
VR agency and the individual and the VR agency agree to a specific extension of time. VR
agencies may extend the 90-day timeline for developing an IPE for eligible individuals with
disabilities if both the VR counselor and individual agree to a specific date by which the IPE will
be completed. Under the circumstances presented by the COVID-19 pandemic, the 60-day
timeline for determining eligibility and the 90-day timeline for developing the IPE may be
extended so long as both the VR counselor and individual agree to a specific extension of time.

Section 102(a)(6) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act) and
34 C.F.R. § 361.41(b)(1) that establish the 60-day time frame for eligibility determinations and

Section 102(a)(6)(A) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.41(b)(1)(i) permit an
extension of that 60-day timeline when there are “exceptional and uncontrollable circumstances”
beyond the control of the VR agency.

Section 102(b)(3)(F) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.45(d) require that the IPE be
developed within 90 days of the eligibility determination and permit an extension of that 90-day
timeline if both the VR counselor and individual agree to a specific date by which the IPE will be
completed.

Further, while many VR agencies have policies and procedures that require signatures from both
the counselor and the individual to acknowledge an agreement to extend the timeline for an
eligibility determination or for developing the IPE, there are no Federal statutory or regulatory
requirements that the VR agency obtain signatures for these purposes. Obtaining written or
electronic signatures is a best practice. If permitted by agency policies and procedures in this
emergency situation, email correspondence between the VR agency and the individual
confirming the agreement for an extension, or a short memorandum placed in a case file with the
date an agreement was reached by phone, for example, could suffice for purposes of the Federal
requirements to document that both the VR counselor and the individual agree to an extension of
time under either of these circumstances.

2

---
Page 3

IPE Signatures

We recognize it may be impossible to obtain required signatures for the IPE or amendments to
the IPE in person. If permitted by agency policies and procedures in this emergency situation,
VR agencies could satisfy the signature requirements in alternative ways, such as sharing the
documents and obtaining the signatures electronically, by fax, or by mail. There may be rare
situations in which the VR agency and an individual have reached an agreement on the contents
of an IPE (or amendment to an IPE), and the VR agency mails the IPE to the individual but has
not received the signed IPE before a necessary and allowable service is to be provided, (e.g., the
individual is engaged in employment training but needs to see a doctor immediately to determine
whether he or she can continue the training). In rare cases such as that one, the VR counselor
should place a short memorandum in the case file documenting the date the agreement was
reached and the date the IPE (or amendment to the IPE) was mailed to the individual (signed by
the VR counselor), so that the service can be provided pending receipt of the signed IPE (or
amendment to the IPE) from the individual. The date on which the memorandum denoting

agreement to the IPE or amendment was placed in the case file should be considered the date of
the IPE or amendment, not the date on which the IPE or amendment was signed by the
individual.

Section 102(b)(4)(C) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.45(d)(3) require the IPE to
be signed and agreed to by the individual, or his or her representative, and the VR counselor
employed by the VR agency. Under Section 103(a) of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.48(b), allowable VR services are those needed by eligible individuals to achieve
an employment outcome, as described in an IPE, and the VR counselor and individual, or his or
her representative as appropriate, must sign amendments to the IPE before they will take effect
(Section 102(b)(4)(E)(iii) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.45(d)(7)). Amendments
to the IPE are necessary when there are substantive changes to the employment outcome or
services to be provided, or in the providers of those services.

Please note that the advice and analysis provided here is specific and limited to the facts
presented, the grants at issue, and the Department’s understanding of the COVID-19 guidance of
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, as well as guidance issued by the Office of
Management and Budget regarding the national emergency.

VR Service Delivery

Q3. What alternatives to face-to-face service delivery are available to VR agencies?

Telephone, online, or other alternative means may be used in place of providing VR and
supported employment services face-to-face, including ongoing support services, during the
unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic. RSA strongly encourages VR agencies to use remote or
virtual service delivery strategies when physical offices are closed to ensure the continuity of

service delivery to individuals with disabilities.

3

---
Page 4

With regard to “ongoing support services” both the statute and regulations permit the VR agency
to provide these services to individuals with the most significant disabilities either at the worksite
or, in specific circumstances, especially at the request of the individual, away from the worksite.
Therefore, VR agencies and their service providers may deliver these services remotely or
virtually as well. Ongoing support services are defined at Section 7(27) of the Rehabilitation Act
and 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(37), which include services such as job coaching, follow-along, and
other services needed to support and maintain an individual with a most significant disability,
including a youth with a most significant disability, in supported employment. Ongoing support
services also include the assessment of employment stability and provision of specific intensive
services or the coordination of such services at least twice a month (Section 7(27)(B) of the
Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(37)(iv)).

If a change in services is determined necessary, we urge the VR agency and service providers to
communicate with each individual being served as soon as possible to plan for how such virtual
ongoing support services will be implemented and to document such changes in each

individual’s IPE, as necessary. To the extent the ongoing support services, if provided in a virtual
setting, represent a substantive change to the services provided or the provider of those services,
then an amendment to the IPE will be required in accordance with Section 102(b)(3)(E)(ii) of the
Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.45(d)(7).

Q4. During the COVID-19 outbreak, must VR agencies determine if comparable
services and benefits are available before providing VR services to eligible
individuals?

Yes, but the Federal statute and regulations do not prescribe what the search for comparable
services and benefits must entail. Therefore, it is reasonable for VR agencies to develop
policies and procedures or regulations that describe search parameters, so long as the search for
comparable services and benefits does not unduly delay the provision of VR services or cause
an interruption in the provision of VR services to eligible individuals.

Section 101(a)(8)(A) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.53(a) require VR agencies,
before providing accommodations, auxiliary aids and services, or other VR services (except for
those services that are exempt), to determine if comparable services and benefits, as defined in
34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(8), exist under other Federal, State, or local public agencies, health
insurance, or employee benefits and are available to an eligible individual, unless the
determination would interrupt or delay the individual’s achievement of an employment
outcome, an immediate job placement, or the provision of VR services to an individual at
extreme medical risk.

VR agencies may experience difficulties in determining the availability of comparable services

or benefits during the COVID-19 pandemic due to the operating status of other programs that
generally offer or provide comparable services and benefits, or restrictions implemented by
States in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Under these circumstances, a VR agency would
meet its Federal statutory and regulatory obligations by documenting in the individual’s service
record in accordance with 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.46 and 361.47(a)(6), the lack of available
comparable services and benefits due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, a VR agency

4

---
Page 5

should seek advice from its own attorneys to ensure the agency complies with all State
requirements currently in effect.

Please note that the advice and analysis provided here is specific and limited to the facts
presented, the grants at issue, and the Department’s understanding of the COVID-19 guidance of
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and guidance issued by the Office of
Management and Budget regarding this national emergency.

Q5. How do accessibility standards for facilities and providers of services apply when
community service providers are teleworking or providing virtual services due to
the COVID-19 pandemic?

VR agencies and service providers whose offices and facilities have remained open to the public,
and continue to be, must adhere to the requirements in the Architectural Barriers Act pertaining
to accessibility standards, including during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, a VR provider
must make good faith and reasonable efforts to comply with all other requirements set forth in
Section 101(a)(6) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.51. Specifically, even when
providing VR services through virtual and other remote strategies, VR agencies still must
continue to ensure they comply with program accessibility requirements in Title II of the

Americans with Disabilities Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. This should not,
however, limit or delay efforts to provide services to individuals with disabilities.

The Department recognizes that in this unique and ever-changing environment, these exceptional
circumstances may affect how VR services are provided. VR agencies also must ensure that VR
service providers communicate with applicants and eligible individuals in their native language
when these individuals have limited English proficiency and use appropriate modes of
communication to meet the needs of applicants and eligible individuals, as required in
34 C.F.R. § 361.51(c). Finally, as a core partner program in the one-stop centers, VR agencies
must ensure they comply with the nondiscrimination requirements of Section 188 of the
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) and 29 C.F.R. part 38, which includes
requirements that the program and its services be provided in an accessible manner to individuals
with disabilities. The requirements of Section 101(a)(6) of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 361.51, as well as, 29 C.F.R. part 38 continue to apply. Under current law, there is
no waiver authority for these requirements.

5

---
Page 6

American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services Program

Q6. How does the guidance for State VR agencies provided in questions 1 through 5
apply to AIVRS projects?

While the specific statutory requirements in Title I of the Rehabilitation Act and regulatory
requirements in 34 C.F.R. part 361 cited in questions 1 through 5 apply only to State VR
agencies and not to AIVRS projects, the guidance provided in those questions may also be useful
in the implementation of AIVRS projects consistent with their approved applications, their
policies and procedures, and Section 121 of the Rehabilitation Act and its implementing
regulations at 34 C.F.R. part 371. Section 121(b)(1(B) of the Rehabilitation Act and
34 C.F.R. § 371.21(a) provide that the VR services provided by AIVRS projects to American
Indians with disabilities be broad in scope and be provided in a manner and at a level of quality
at least comparable to those services provided by the State VR agency. The AIVRS regulations
also provide that AIVRS projects will fully consider any comparable services and benefits
available to American Indians with disabilities under any program which might meet in whole or
in part the cost of any VR service at 34 C.F.R. § 371.21(h); and, at 34 C.F.R. § 371.21(j) and (k),

the regulations address accessibility of facilities and services. AIVRS projects must develop and
maintain policies and procedures regarding the provision of services under 34 C.F.R. § 371.43(d)
and informed choice under 34 C.F.R. § 371.43(e), that would address IPE development and
service delivery. If an amendment to those policies and procedures is necessary in order to
implement any of this guidance, AIVRS projects should follow tribal procedures in doing so. If a
modification of an AIVRS project’s approved application is necessary, then the AIVRS project
director should consult with RSA.

Pre-Employment Transition Services

Q 7. How may VR agencies handle the interruption of pre-employment transition
services for students with disabilities during the COVID-19 pandemic?

VR agencies must continue to make good faith and reasonable efforts to provide pre-
employment transition services to each student with a disability based on the student’s needs,
and consistent with the health, safety and welfare of both individuals with disabilities and those
providing services. This means that a VR agency may need to repeat the provision of pre-
employment transition services to a student with a disability in the event the provision of those
services was interrupted, if doing so is necessary to meet the needs of the student. This would be
true whether the interruption is due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a student’s illness, or another
reason.

Pursuant to Section 113(a) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.48(a), VR agencies, in
coordination with local educational agencies, must provide, or arrange for the provision of, pre-
employment transition services to all students with disabilities in need of such services. Neither

the Rehabilitation Act nor its implementing regulations impose any limitations on the number or
frequency of these services; however, the VR agency should make the determination to repeat
services that have been disrupted on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the resources of the
VR agency allocated for this purpose and the reasonable expenditure of funds.

6

---
Page 7

Section 511

Q8. How may VR agencies provide required career counseling and information and
referral services and meet the requirements under Section 511 of the Rehabilitation
Act given the challenges posed by COVID-19?

Providing Services

VR agencies may provide career counseling and information and referral (CC&I&R) services
in the manner that they consider most appropriate and effective. Because neither the
Rehabilitation Act nor its implementing regulations in 34 C.F.R. part 397 prescribe how
CC&I&R services must be provided, CC&I&R services may be provided by telephone or
remotely through electronic or web-based delivery. These virtual options will enable the
continuous delivery of required CC&I&R services for youth with disabilities seeking, and
individuals with disabilities of any age engaged in, subminimum wage employment (Sections
511(a)(2)(B)(ii) and 511((c) of the Rehabilitation Act), even if VR agency offices or worksites
are closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

The purpose of CC&I&R services is to provide career counseling and referrals to Federal and
State programs in the individual’s geographic area that offer employment-related services and
supports designed to enable the individual with a disability to explore, discover, experience,

and attain competitive integrated employment (Sections 511(a)(2)(B)(ii)(I) and 511(c)(1)(A) of
the Rehabilitation Act). Section 511(c)(1)(A) of the Rehabilitation Act makes clear that
CC&I&R services are delivered in a manner that facilitates independent decision making and
informed choice.

Documenting services

A VR agency may transmit the documentation demonstrating completion of CC&I&R services
in a variety of ways, including hand-delivery, mail, fax, and email. Though the regulations at
34 C.F.R. §§ 397.10, 397.30, and 397.40 prescribe the content of the documentation required for
CC&I&R services (and other required services under Section 511 of the Rehabilitation Act, and
Sections 511(a)(2)(B), 511(c), and 511(d)), nothing in the Rehabilitation Act or its implementing
regulations limits the VR agency’s use of virtual means for transmitting documentation required
by Section 511. Similarly, the individual with a disability also may use virtual means, such as
mail, email, and fax transmissions to send documentation to the employer required by Section
511, in order to obtain or maintain subminimum wage employment.

Frequency of services and verification of prerequisite activities.

Employers’ compliance with Section 511 requirements, including those related to CC&I&R
services that cannot be done in a timely manner due to the inability to reach the individual or due
to the closure of the worksite, fall under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Department of Labor, Wage
and Hour Division (WHD). Therefore, all decisions regarding flexibility in these limited areas
will be made by that agency. The WHD is continuing to review the statutory requirements in
light of this unprecedented public emergency and will communicate with its Section 14(c)
certificate holders concerning compliance with these requirements.

7

---
Page 8

Section 511(c)(2) of the Rehabilitation Act requires that the CC&I&R services be provided every
six months during the first year of the individual’s employment at subminimum wage and
annually thereafter. Section 511(e) of the Rehabilitation Act requires the employer to verify that
the individual has completed all required activities, including CC&I&R, before hiring or
continuing to employ that individual with a disability at subminimum wage.

However, if individuals with disabilities are not available because telephone communication or
online access is not feasible (e.g., the employee does not have internet access or cannot
communicate well over the telephone), thereby making it impossible for the VR agency to meet
the timelines for the provision of services, the VR agency should document this fact and
communicate it to the holder of the special wage certificate under Section 14(c) of the Fair Labor
Standards Act that referred the individual initially.

RSA Monitoring

Q9. How is RSA addressing the time frames for Federal fiscal year (FFY) 2019
monitoring reports and corrective action plans?

VR agencies should contact their State Liaisons at the Rehabilitation Services Administration to
discuss their particular needs in meeting the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic to
their ability to engage in monitoring activities, such as reviewing and responding to draft
monitoring reports and developing and implementing corrective action plans.

Data Collection and Reporting

Q10. Will RSA delay implementation of the revised Case Service Report (RSA-911)
scheduled for Program Year (PY) 2020?

RSA still plans to implement the revised RSA-911 for PY 2020 beginning July 1, 2020. The first
quarterly report using the revised RSA-911 is due by November 15, 2020.

In May 2020, RSA plans to share the updated Edit Specifications related to the revised RSA-911
to assist VR agencies with developing internal controls for collecting and reporting accurate and
valid performance data.

RSA issued the revised RSA-911 for PY 2020 and future years on May 6, 2019, through RSA
Policy Directive 19-03, The revised RSA-911 will collect data required by both the
Rehabilitation Act and Section 116 of WIOA necessary for determining compliance with
requirements under the VR program and levels of performance for purposes of the performance
accountability system under WIOA.

If VR agencies have specific issues in using the revised RSA-911, they should contact their State
Liaisons at the Rehabilitation Services Administration to discuss their particular needs.

8

---
Page 9

Q11. Does the VR program’s statistical adjustment model for Measurable Skill Gains
address unusual situations such as what VR agencies are experiencing with
COVID-19?

It is too soon to estimate the extent to which this model can address the effects of COVID-19.
The U.S. Departments of Education and Labor (Departments) will closely monitor the impact of
COVID-19 on grantee performance and service delivery and will ensure objective and fair
performance assessments.

Title I of WIOA requires the Departments to use statistical adjustment models to adjust for
changes in economic conditions and participant characteristics when establishing and adjusting
levels of performance. Once States submit PY 2020 and PY 2021 indicator data (on October 1,
2021 and 2022, respectively), performance indicators will be re-estimated using the actual
participant characteristics and economic conditions for the States to calculate the adjusted levels
of performance. At that time, the impact of COVID-19 will be reflected in the participant and
State employment predictor values when performance indicators are re-estimated.

Business Enterprise Program

Q12. May RSA waive the requirement of 34 C.F.R. § 395.4(a), which requires States to
submit rules and regulations, including any changes in policies related to the use of

set-aside funds, to RSA for review and approval prior to implementation?
No. RSA has no authority to waive this requirement. However, RSA is committed to expediting

its review of changes in State policies due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including those related to
the use of set-aside funds. Only in reviewing the proposed policies can RSA help ensure that the
change in policies have has been reached with the consent of the State’s Elected Committee of
Blind Vendors (34 C.F.R. § 395.14(b)(1)), and, if applicable voted on by a majority of the blind
vendors licensed in the State (34 C.F.R. § 395.9(b)(5)). RSA must ensure that, if implemented,
any policy changes will comply with Federal requirements under both the Rehabilitation Act and
the Randolph-Sheppard Act. RSA has expedited the review for States that have submitted policy
changes to RSA related to the COVID-19 pandemic in recent weeks and will continue to do so,
thereby enabling States to implement revised policies in a timely manner that comply with
Federal requirements.

Q13. Are VR agencies that serve as State Licensing Agencies (SLAs) for the Business
Enterprise Program (BEP) allowed to use VR program funds to pay blind vendors a
fair minimum return, a permitted purpose of set-aside funds under the BEP
program at 34 C.F.R. § 395.9(b)(4)?

No. VR funds may not be used to pay blind vendors a fair minimum return. VR agencies may
only use VR program funds to pay for expenditures incurred in carrying out activities specified
in Section 103(b)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5), including the
acquisition of vending facilities or other vending equipment by VR agencies, management and
supervision services, initial stocks and supplies, and initial operating expenses. A fair minimum

return is not a cost that is allowable or allocable to the VR program, pursuant to

9

---
Page 10

2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through 200.405. Under current law, there is no legal authority to waive
these requirements.

States do have the discretion to set aside funds from the net proceeds of the operations of
vending facilities for specific allowed purposes, consistent with Section 107(b)(3) of the
Randolph-Sheppard Act and 34 C.F.R. § 395.9. Among the options States could consider is to
use their set-aside funds to assure a fair minimum return for vendors during the time their
businesses are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Many States traditionally use the BEP set-aside funds, which are non-Federal funds, for purposes
that are also allowable activities under the VR program (i.e., maintenance and replacement of
equipment, purchase of new equipment, and management and supervision services) in order to
assist with satisfying their match and maintenance of effort (MOE) requirements under the VR
program. However, there is no requirement that VR agencies use the set-aside funds for these
expenditures. It is permissible for the VR program to pay all costs associated with allowable BEP
activities with VR program funds. In so doing, the VR agencies, as the SLAs, would have the
entire amount of set-aside funds available to use for purposes not permitted under the VR

program, such as the payment of a fair minimum return. Should a State decide to implement this
option, if it is a change in current policy, it must seek agreement of the Elected Committee of
Blind Vendors and approval of RSA, and it must also take into consideration its effect on the
State’s ability to satisfy match and MOE requirements under the VR program. RSA staff will
provide technical assistance, upon request, to any State needing assistance in this area.

10