RSA-TAC-21-02

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON, DC 20202-2800

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CIRCULAR
RSA-TAC-21-02
DATE: June 7, 2021

ADDRESSEES: STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AGENCIES
ELECTED COMMITTEES OF BLIND VENDORS
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
ALL OTHER FEDERAL AGENCIES

SUBJECT: The Application of the Randolph-Sheppard Act Priority for Blind
Vendors to the Operation of Vending Machines on Federal Property and
the Use of Third-Party Vendors on that Property

PURPOSE:

Based on reviews of State rules and regulations under the Randolph-Sheppard Act (R-S Act) and
inquiries from State licensing agencies (SLAs) and Federal agencies, the Rehabilitation Services
Administration (RSA) has learned that confusion exists regarding how the R-S Act’s priority for
blind vendors applies to the operation of vending machines on Federal property, and how the R-S
Act’s vending machine income sharing requirements are implicated by contracting with third-
party vendors if no blind person is operating a vending machine on Federal property.

The guidance in this technical assistance circular (TAC) describes the requirements in the R-S
Act and its implementing regulations that provide a priority for persons who are blind to operate
vending facilities, including vending machines, on Federal property. If the SLA is not able to
provide a blind vendor to operate vending machines on Federal property, the Federal agency may
decline to provide a permit to the SLA. The Federal agency may then choose to contract with a
third-party vendor to operate the machines and is obligated to provide the vending machine
income to the SLA. It is inconsistent with the R-S Act for the SLA to contract directly with third-
party vendors to operate vending machines on Federal property as explained further in this TAC.

The guidance contained in this TAC is intended to assist SLAs and Elected Committees of Blind
Vendors (ECBVs) in developing their State rules and regulations and to assist SLAs and Federal
agencies when negotiating permits for vending machines and the distribution of vending machine
income from vending machines on Federal property. Ensuring the operation of vending machines
on Federal property is implemented in a manner consistent with the requirements of the R-S Act
helps to fulfill the purpose of the R-S Act to provide remunerative employment for individuals
who are blind and to help them to be self-supporting.

1

---
Page 2

Other than statutory and regulatory requirements included in this document, the contents of this
guidance do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public. This
document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under
the law or agency policies.

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE:

Operation of Vending Machines by Blind Vendors

The R-S Act requires that Federal agencies provide a priority for individuals who are blind and
who are licensed by an SLA in the operation of vending facilities on Federal property. Section
107(b) provides:

In authorizing the operation of vending facilities on Federal property, priority shall be given to
blind persons licensed by a State agency as provided in this Act; and the Secretary, through the
Commissioner, shall . . . prescribe regulations designed to assure that --

1) The priority under this subsection is given to such licensed blind persons
(including assignment of vending machine income pursuant to section 7 of
this Act to achieve and protect such priority), and

2) Wherever feasible, one or more vending facilities are established on all
Federal property to the extent that any such facility or facilities would not
adversely affect the interests of the United States.

Automatic vending machines are included in the definition of a “vending facility” under Section
107e(7) of the R-S Act and its implementing regulations at 34 C.F.R. § 395.1(x). “Vending
machine, for the purpose of assigning vending machine income …means a coin or currency
operated machine which dispenses articles or services, except that those machines operated by

the United States Postal service for the sale of postage stamps or other postal products and
services, machines providing services of a recreational nature, and telephones shall not be
considered to be vending machines.” 34 C.F.R. § 395.1(y)

Thus, under the R-S Act, a Federal agency has the responsibility to give a priority to blind
persons to operate vending machines on Federal property. There may be circumstances,
however, when an SLA does not have a blind person available to operate a vending machine on
Federal property. In that case, the R-S Act addresses how Federal agencies may contract with
third-party commercial vending concerns (third-party vendors) to operate the vending machines
and how they must distribute the vending machine income to the SLAs.

Vending machine income is defined at Section 107e(8) of the R-S Act and 34 C.F.R. § 395.1(z)
of the regulations as “receipts (other than those of a blind vendor) from vending machine
operations on Federal property, after deducting the cost of goods sold (including reasonable
service and maintenance costs in accordance with customary business practices of commercial
vending concerns[)], where the machines are operated, serviced, or maintained by, or with the

approval of, a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States, or commissions paid
2

---
Page 3

(other than to a blind vendor) by a commercial vending concern which operates, services and
maintains vending machines on Federal property for, or with the approval of, a department,
agency or instrumentality of the United States.”

Use of Third-Party Vendors on Federal Property

Section 107d-3 of the R-S Act and the regulations at 34 C.F.R. § 395.32 address the situation in
which a third-party vendor is used to operate, service, or maintain the vending machines, as
defined under 34 C.F.R. § 395.1(y), on Federal property for, or with the approval of a Federal
agency, producing vending machine income, as defined by the R-S Act and regulations, and how
the vending machine income in those situations is accrued and disbursed. The Federal agency
official is the one responsible for ensuring compliance with the vending machine requirements,
including collecting and accounting for the income. When the Federal agency contracts with a

third-party vendor to operate vending machines on Federal property, the amount of income the
agency pays to the SLA depends on whether there is already a blind vendor operating another
vending facility on the Federal property. If there is, then Section 107d-3(b)(1) of the R-S Act and
34 C.F.R. § 395.32(b) provide that the Federal agency is required to accrue and pay to the SLA
100 percent of the vending machine income from the vending machines on the Federal property
which are operated by a third-party vendor in direct competition with a vending facility operated
by a blind vendor. If there is no blind vendor operating a vending facility on the Federal
property, 50 percent of all vending machine income from the third-party vendor accrues to the
SLA as provided in Section 107d-3(b)(1) of the R-S Act and 34 C.F.R § 395.32(c).1

As noted above, vending machine income, in pertinent part, is the receipts from vending machine
operations on Federal property, after deducting the costs of goods sold (including reasonable
service and maintenance costs), where machines are operated by the Federal agency or
commissions paid by a third-party vendor which operates the machines for the Federal agency.
After the Federal agency pays the vending machine income to the SLA, the SLA disburses it to
the blind vendor on the property or to blind vendors in the State in accordance with 34 C.F.R.

§ 395.8.

Under 34 C.F.R. § 395.32(h), if a Federal agency has contracted with a third-party vendor
because an SLA had no blind vendor available to operate vending machines, the Federal agency
must afford an SLA the opportunity to exercise its priority for blind vendors to operate vending
facilities on the Federal property at the expiration of the arrangement with the commercial
vending concern:

• (h) All arrangements pertaining to the operation of vending machines on Federal property not
covered by contract with, or by permits issued to, State licensing agencies, shall be renegotiated
upon the expiration of the existing contract or other arrangement for consistency with the
provisions of this section.

1 Section 395.32(d) is an exception to this general rule, providing that 30 percent of all vending machine
income from vending machines on Federal property where there is no vending facility operated by a blind
vendor will accrue to the SLA if at least 50 percent of the total hours worked on the premises occurs
during a period other than normal working hours.
3

---
Page 4

The R-S Act makes clear in Section 107(b) that Federal agencies are required to provide the
priority for blind vendors and that the vending machine income-sharing provisions are designed
to “achieve and protect” that priority. The priority for blind vendors does not extend to SLAs
installing third-party vendors or individuals who are not blind to operate vending machines on
Federal property as it would be inconsistent with the plain language in the R-S Act to do so.
Thus, an SLA is not permitted to contract with third-party vendors, instead of assigning a blind
vendor to operate vending machines, even if it determines the income from the commercial
vendors would be more profitable to the State’s Randolph-Sheppard program. To do so would be
inconsistent with the R-S Act’s stated purpose to provide employment and economic
opportunities to individuals who are blind and to strive to make them self-supporting.

When an SLA does not have a blind vendor available to operate vending machines on Federal
property, a Federal agency may decline to provide the SLA with a permit for the operation of the
vending machines, and it is the Federal agency that may contract with a third-party vendor to
operate the machines. The SLA does not have the authority to do so. If the Federal agency
engages such a third-party vendor, the Federal agency must share the required percentage of the
vending machine income with the SLA, which must distribute and use the income in accordance
with 34 C.F.R. § 395.8. Under Section 107d-3(f) of the R-S Act and 34 C.F.R. § 395.32(j),
Federal agencies may promulgate regulations or make arrangements with SLAs that allow for a
greater percentage or amount of vending machine income than specified in the Federal
requirements.

SUMMARY:

The Randolph-Sheppard program exists to benefit blind individuals and to provide them with
opportunities to become self-supporting. The R-S Act provides a priority for persons who are

blind to operate vending facilities, including vending machines on Federal property. If the SLA
is not able to provide a blind vendor to operate vending machines on Federal property, the
Federal agency may decline to provide a permit to the SLA and may contract with a third-party
vendor to operate the vending machines, sharing the vending machine income with the SLA as
required by the R-S Act. It is inconsistent with the R-S Act and undermines its purpose for an
SLA, rather than the Federal agency, to contract directly with a third-party vendor or persons
who are not blind to operate vending machines on Federal property, even if that vendor increases
funding for a State’s Randolph-Sheppard program. When an SLA increases the number of
individuals who are blind and operating vending facilities on Federal property, the SLA also
helps those agencies fulfill their responsibility under the R-S Act to provide economic
opportunities to blind persons.

CITATIONS:

Randolph-Sheppard Act, 20 U.S.C. §§ 107(a), 107(b), 107d-3, 107e(7), 107e(8).
Randolph-Sheppard Act Regulations found at 34 C.F.R. §§ 395.1(x), 395.1(y), 395.1(z), 395.4,

395.8. 395.32, in particular, (b), (c), (d), (h), and (j).
4

---
Page 5

INQUIRIES:

Corinne Weidenthal, Chief
Service Programs Unit
(202)-245-6529
Corinne.Weidenthal@ed.gov

/s/
Carol L. Dobak
Acting Deputy Commissioner,
delegated the authority to perform the
functions and duties of the Commissioner

5