rsa-faq-wioa-vr-covid-19-03-26-2020

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES

March 26, 2020

The Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services’ Rehabilitation Services

Administration (RSA) issues this Questions and Answers document to outline its plans for
implementing performance accountability provisions under title I of the Workforce Innovation
and Opportunity Act (WIOA) as State Vocational Rehabilitation (VR) agencies seek to provide
continuity of operations for individuals with disabilities in the current COVID-19 environment.

In the near future, RSA plans to issue additional Questions and Answers related to the VR
program and State Supported Employment Services program to respond to other questions that
State VR agencies have recently asked. State VR agencies should contact their RSA State
Liaison with additional questions. Additional information specific to the COVID-19 pandemic
may be found online at https://www.ed.gov/coronavirus.

WIOA Performance Accountability

Q1. What steps will RSA take to account for a decrease in State performance in Program
Year (PY) 2019 because of extended program closures during the pandemic? Will
States be penalized for performance issues?

The U.S. Departments of Education and Labor (Departments) will not make any determinations
of performance success or failure based on PY 2019 performance data, submitted by October 1,
RSA did not establish performance levels with VR agencies for PY 2019. Therefore,
without this data, we will not have the requisite data to determine whether a State has met its
performance levels. The Departments will take the effect of the COVID-19 outbreak into
consideration in reviewing PY 2019 data. RSA encourages State VR agencies to remain in
contact with RSA related to the impact of COVID-19 on service delivery and performance
outcomes.

RSA Technical Assistance Circular 20-021 states that the first year for which performance
success or failure can be determined for some indicators applies to PY 2020; this data is reported

by October 1, 2021. The Departments will continue to closely monitor the effect of the COVID-
19 outbreak and its impact on services and performance outcomes.

Q2. Will RSA consider delaying performance negotiations, as State offices may be closed
for an unspecified period of time?

At this time, the U.S. Department of Education (the Department) anticipates that the negotiations
process will proceed, and we will conduct negotiations with States. The Department anticipates

1 RSA TAC 20-02: Negotiations and Sanctions Guidance for the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act
• (WIOA) Core Programs is available at: https://www2.ed.gov/policy/speced/guid/rsa/subregulatory/tac-20-02.pdf

400 MARYLAND AVE. S.W., WASHINGTON, DC 20202-2600
www.ed.gov
The Department of Education’s mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness
by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.

---
Page 2

negotiated levels of performance will be included in the approved Unified or Combined State
Plans for the four-year period covering PYs 2020 through 2023. The Department is aware that
some State offices are closed, and some States have implemented remote work. The Department
is also aware that State agency leadership and management staff may be involved with
COVID-19 response efforts. As a result, the Department will be as flexible as possible in
conducting negotiations, including scheduling meetings at times that meet States’ needs.