RSA-FAQ-21-06

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
June 14, 2021
FAQ 21-06

Frequently Asked Questions
Part Two

Randolph-Sheppard Act
Financial Relief and Restoration Payments Appropriation

The Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA), within the U.S. Department of Education’s

• (Department) Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, issues this second1
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) document in response to inquiries concerning the
administration of the Randolph-Sheppard Financial Relief and Restoration Payments (FRRP)
Appropriation.

In the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, Division H, Title III, Section 318 (Section 318),
Congress directs the Department to make $20 million available for the purpose of making grants
to State licensing agencies (SLA) designated to administer the Randolph-Sheppard Act (Act).
Section 318 directs the Department to make grants to SLAs in the same proportion as the number
of blind vendors operating a vending facility in a State as compared to the number of blind
vendors operating a vending facility in all the States on September 30, 2019. The SLAs must use
these grants:

• • to make financial relief and restoration payments to offset losses of blind vendors that
occurred during calendar year 2020 and which were not otherwise compensated; and

• • for other purposes authorized under 34 C.F.R. § 395.9 but only to the extent any funds
remain after the SLA makes financial relief and restoration payments to blind vendors to
cover their losses incurred in calendar year 2020.

The funds will remain available for obligation by the Secretary until September 30, 2021.

Other than statutory and regulatory requirements included in this document, the contents of this
guidance do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public. This
document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under
the law or agency policies.

Q1. Which vendors are eligible to receive FRRP payments?

Section 318 makes clear that only vendors who incurred an uncompensated loss in calendar year
2020 are eligible to receive FRRP payments. Therefore, an SLA must have a basis for

determining whether a vendor incurred a previously uncompensated loss in order to determine a

1 RSA issued the first set of FAQs related to the Randolph-Sheppard FRRP Appropriation on March 12, 2021. See
Randolph-Sheppard Act Financial Relief and Restoration Payments Appropriation.
1

---
Page 2

vendor’s eligibility to receive FRRP payments. If a vendor did not incur a loss in calendar year
2020 or if the vendor has already been compensated for that loss, the vendor is not eligible to
receive FRRP payments. See also information provided in Q2 and Q4 below and in Q1 and Q2 in
the first FAQs issued March 12, 2021, regarding losses and compensation, respectively.

Q2. Can a vendor receive funds exceeding its losses if the Elected Committee of Blind
Vendors (Elected Committee) votes to distribute FRRPs equally to eligible vendors?

No. The FRRP payments can only be used to offset vendor losses not otherwise compensated. As
noted in the answer to Q2 in RSA’s first FAQ document, a vendor’s 2020 losses could be
calculated in many ways. The SLA and Elected Committee should take a flexible and reasonable
view on how to determine vendor losses, considering the varying circumstances that may be
occurring in their State. For example, a vendor may operate multiple vending facilities and only

some may have closed during 2020. The open facilities may have seen an increased volume
during the 2020 calendar year; however, considering the income the vendor would have received
if all the facilities had been open during 2020, the vendor may still have incurred a loss. In sum,
the amount of FRRP payments a vendor receives must not exceed the total amount of 2020
uncompensated losses the vendor incurred.

Q3. What level of detail should an SLA include in its response to Part B, number 1 of the
Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form?

Part B, number 1 of the Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form asks the SLA to “[e]xplain
briefly how the SLA will distribute the FRRP funds to blind vendors to offset losses incurred
during the 2020 calendar year.” In answering this question, an SLA needs to provide enough
detail in its response to demonstrate that the SLA determined that: (1) each vendor who will
receive FRRP payments incurred an uncompensated loss in calendar year 2020, and (2) that loss

equals or exceeds the amount the vendor will receive in FRRP payments. Therefore, each SLA,
should determine, with the active participation of the Elected Committee2 and describe in
response to Part B, number 1 of the Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form how the SLA will
distribute the FRRP funds. For example, the SLA could describe the proportion of each vendor’s
uncompensated losses it will offset, or it could explain that it has enough funds to fully
compensate all vendors based on the number of uncompensated losses each vendor incurred.
Each State’s situation will be different, but such level of detail is necessary to ensure that the
SLA distributes the funds in a manner consistent with the statutory requirements of the FRRP
Appropriation – specifically to provide financial relief and restoration payments to offset
uncompensated losses incurred by blind vendors in calendar year 2020. Finally, the level of
detail RSA is requesting on the Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form will help the SLA
demonstrate that any remaining FRRP funds that are deposited into the set-aside account are
done so only after the uncompensated losses incurred by blind vendors in calendar year 2020 are
covered by FRRP payments.

2Active participation would include discussion with the Elected Committee, establishing how the SLA
will calculate losses, determine compensation, and distribute the FRRP payments, but does not have to
include information regarding individual vendor payment amounts. See 34 C.F.R. § 395.14 and Technical
Assistance Circular RSA-TAC-21-01.
2

---
Page 3

See Q5 below for additional supporting information the SLA may need to obtain from a vendor,
as necessary on a case-by-case basis, to respond to Part B, number 1 of the Assurances and Use
of FRRP Funds form.

Q4. How should an SLA determine what payments to vendors constitute compensation for
purposes of the FRRP funds?

An SLA should use the information set forth in Q5 of the first FAQ document, and as is clarified
further herein, when assessing whether a payment previously received by a vendor is considered
compensation for purposes of the FRRP funds. Specifically, if a vendor received a benefit after a

loss was incurred, whether that benefit is considered compensation should be a case-by-case
determination depending on the benefit, the connection between the benefit and the loss, and any
other relevant facts of the particular circumstance.

As it pertains to payments made by an SLA under the Act for fair minimum return (FMR) and
sick/vacation leave paid from the set-aside funds under 34 C.F.R § 395.9 to assist vendors during
2020, such payments would have a close connection between the benefit received and the loss
sustained. In States where such payments were made in 2020 to help vendors who were incurring
losses due to the COVID-19 pandemic (or for other reasons beyond their control), RSA
considers such payments compensation when determining whether a vendor’s losses were
previously compensated. Note that even if an SLA provided FMR payments or vacation/sick
leave payments to vendors in 2020, a vendor’s losses may exceed the compensation received,
making the vendor eligible for FRRP payments in an amount not exceeding the uncompensated
loss incurred.

If an SLA believes that the FMR payments or sick/vacation payments made to vendors in 2020
were not made to assist vendors in recovering from losses but were made in the routine course of
implementing its usual policy and practice separate from any consideration of income (e.g., if
every vendor in the State received a FMR payment regardless of the vendor’s income), or some
other unique circumstance exists that makes these payments not compensation, the SLA should
provide the information that demonstrates this in its response to Part B, number 4 of the
Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form. Therefore, the SLA should provide information
specifically addressing any FMR payments and sick/vacation payments made in 2020
(information that RSA already has on the State’s 2020 RSA-15) regarding the SLA’s use of set-
aside funds for these purposes in order to respond to Part B, number 4’s question regarding
compensation. (See Q5 below and Q5 of the first FAQ document for more detailed information
about completing number 4 on Part B of the Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form.) As RSA
noted in response to Q5 in the first FAQ document, while an SLA should determine whether the
benefits a vendor received from another source have a close connection to the loss the vendor
incurred in 2020 to be considered compensation, RSA does not make an assessment as to
whether payments such as Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans, unemployment benefits,

and Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) are compensation in the context of the FRRP
funds because those programs fall within the purview of other Federal and State agencies, not
RSA. RSA notes, however, that because of the varying circumstances in each State and for each
individual vendor, it is reasonable for different States to make different decisions regarding these
and similar Federal and State programs.

3

---
Page 4

The determinations made by an SLA, as described above, are necessary to ensure the SLA
satisfies the requirement of Section 318, specifically to ensure that FRRP payments made to
blind vendors offset losses that were incurred in calendar year 2020 and which were not
otherwise compensated. Therefore, as noted in the response to Q5 of these FAQs, because Part
B, number 4 of the Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form asks an SLA to describe how it will
ensure the vendors’ losses were not previously compensated, the SLA, with the active
participation of the Elected Committee, needs to address whether certain payments a vendor may
have received constitute compensation. Depending on that decision, the SLA may need
information from the vendor detailing such payments.

Q5. What level of detail should an SLA include in its response to Part B, number 4 of the
Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form?

Part B, number 4 of the Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form asks an SLA, “[h]ow will the
SLA ensure blind vendor losses were not previously compensated?” RSA needs to know how the
SLA determined that the blind vendors’ losses were not previously compensated to ensure that
the SLA satisfies the requirement of Section 318. The SLA can demonstrate this to RSA in its
response by, for instance, describing what decisions were made with the required active
participation of the Elected Committee, about the types of payments to vendors that are
considered “compensation” and by describing the supporting documentation obtained from
vendors concerning compensation for losses they received, as appropriate. For more information
on compensation and documentation related to the compensation, see Q3 and Q5 in these FAQs.

Q6. What supporting documentation will an SLA need to obtain from vendors to show
losses were not otherwise compensated?

While Part B of the Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form does not require an SLA to submit
supporting documentation to demonstrate that the agency is distributing the FRRP funds in
accordance with statutory requirements, 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.302 and 200.303 require the SLA to
retain supporting documentation to demonstrate that the agency is satisfying Federal
requirements (i.e., that only eligible vendors are receiving FRRP funds and in amounts that do
not exceed their uncompensated losses incurred in calendar year 2020). In each State, it is up to
the SLA, after active participation with the Elected Committee, to determine how much and what
kind of documentation is required to show the vendor’s uncompensated losses, depending on
how losses are calculated and what payments to vendors are considered compensation, consistent
with Q4 above. Because an SLA must make supporting documentation available to RSA upon
request, it must be able to access the supporting documentation from vendors if not retained by
the SLA (consistent with the assurances noted in 34 C.F.R. § 395.3(a)(11)(viii) and (ix)). An
SLA is ultimately responsible to demonstrate that it is complying with fiscal requirements

applicable to all Federal grant recipients, that it has internal controls in place, as required by
2 C.F.R. §§ 200.302 and 200.303 and is complying with Assurance 7 of the signed Assurances in
Part A.

It is likely that an SLA will already have in its possession some of the documentation needed to
respond to Part B, number 1 of the Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form, to support the

4

---
Page 5

losses incurred by vendors (e.g., profit/loss statements submitted routinely by each vendor that
show the amount of loss incurred by each vendor). However, an SLA may need to give
individual vendors an opportunity, on a case-by-case basis, to provide supplemental information
to support additional losses, if any, not reflected in the profit/loss statements. Such additional
supporting information would be important if the profit/loss statement, for example, does not
reflect all losses incurred by the vendor, such as discarding and replacing spoiled or expired
stock and supplies. The vendor must retain supporting documentation of all losses incurred and
which form the basis of the FRRP payments. The vendor must make the supporting
documentation available to the SLA upon request to document that Federal funds are being used
in an allowable manner, consistent with 2 C.F.R. § 200.329.

In addition, in developing a response to Part B, number 4 of the Assurances and Use of FRRP

Funds form, an SLA may need to obtain additional information from each vendor to determine
whether the losses incurred in calendar year 2020 were not previously compensated. In the event
the SLA determines, with the active participation of the Elected Committee, that no vendor in the
State received compensation that had a close connection to the loss (as described in Q4 of these
FAQs), then no further documentation is needed from the vendor. In addition, if the SLA paid
out FMR or sick/vacation payments for losses incurred in calendar year 2020 as described in Q4
of these FAQs, then no further documentation is needed from the vendor because the SLA has
the necessary documentation in its files. However, if the SLA, with active participation of the
Elected Committee, determines, for example, that unemployment compensation benefits
constitute compensation for purposes of FRRP funds, the SLA would need to obtain some
documentation from the vendor such as a signed attestation under penalty of perjury that the
vendor suffered a loss of a specific amount and that the vendor did not receive any payments in
the form of unemployment compensation benefits to offset that loss or that the vendor received a
specific amount of unemployment compensation benefits to offset that loss. Obtaining such an
attestation or other verification of compensation received by the vendor could help the SLA
ensure it is satisfying the requirements of Section 318 and 2 C.F.R. part 200. While there is no

Federal requirement that the vendor provide documentation to the SLA to support the amount of
compensation received, it will be important that the vendor retain this supporting documentation
so that it can be provided to the SLA upon request.

Q7. Can an SLA use FRRP funds as set-aside and make FMR payments to vendors in
calendar year 2021?

Yes. Once all eligible vendors in the State are fully compensated for losses incurred during
calendar year 2020, the SLA may use the remaining FRRP funds for all the set-aside purposes
authorized by 34 C.F.R. § 395.9, including FMR payments to vendors in calendar year 2021 and
through September 30, 2022, which is the end of the period of performance for the FRRP award.
The SLA is required to actively participate with the Elected Committee when making these
decisions.

Q8. Must FRRP payments be reported as income for FY 2021 taxes?

Because this question asks for an interpretation of laws administered by other Federal and State
agencies, RSA encourages SLAs to seek guidance from their in-house attorneys or Attorneys

5

---
Page 6

General on Federal and State tax law implications with respect to the distribution of these funds
to blind vendors. The vendors should also be encouraged to seek advice from their own tax
advisors as to how these payments should be reported to the Internal Revenue Service and State
tax authorities.

Q9. Can SLAs apply set-aside charges against FRRP payments?

No. The FRRP funds are not net proceeds from the operation of vending facilities and, therefore,
are not subject to set-aside payment requirements. However, if any funds remain after an SLA
makes financial relief and restoration payments to vendors to cover their losses incurred in 2020,
those funds may be placed in the SLA’s set-aside account for purposes authorized by 34 C.F.R.
§ 395.9. As noted in Assurance 6 of the FRRP Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds, expenditures
paid with FRRP funds from the set-aside account may not be used to satisfy the match

requirement under the Vocational Rehabilitation program because FRRP funds are Federal
funds, not non-Federal funds. Therefore, SLAs will need to account for any FRRP funds
deposited into the set-aside differently than other set-aside funds deposited from the vendor net
proceeds or Federal unassigned vending machine income.

Q10. How quickly will RSA make FRRP funds available to an SLA after receiving
its Assurances and Use of FRRP Funds form?

RSA cannot provide an exact timeframe for making an award after receiving an Assurances and
Use of FRRP Funds form, as this is a new process, and RSA may have to work with a State to
resolve any issues with the information provided in its form. However, barring any unforeseen
circumstances, RSA is committed to making awards as quickly as possible and will disburse
FRRP funds to SLAs on a rolling basis after approving the FRRP Assurances and Use of FRRP
Funds forms.

6