RSA-TAC-24-03

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON, DC 20202-2800

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CIRCULAR
RSA-TAC-24-03
DATE: April 5, 2024

ADDRESSEES: STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AGENCIES
STATE REHABILITATION COUNCILS
CLIENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS
STATE LICENSING AGENCIES

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTERS

SUBJECT: Use of VR Program Funds for Initial Stocks and Supplies and Operating
Expenses for Vendors Under the Randolph-Sheppard Vending Facilities
Program

PURPOSE:

The Randolph-Sheppard vending facilities program (RSVFP) provides remunerative
employment for individuals who are blind through the operation of vending facilities on Federal
and other property. The Randolph-Sheppard Act (R-S Act)1 gives priority for such individuals
who are licensed by a State licensing agency (SLAs),2 to operate vending facilities, including
cafeterias, on Federal property. With the Vocational Rehabilitation Amendments of 1954,
Congress emphasized a critical nexus between the RSVFP and the Vocational Rehabilitation
• (VR) program by expanding the scope of VR services to encompass the acquisition of vending
stands, equipment, and stocks and necessary supplies to enable individuals with significant

disabilities to operate any type of small business enterprise under State agency management and
supervision. The expenditure of VR funds for these purposes for the benefit of the RSVFP
remained an authorized service to groups under the VR program when the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act) was enacted, and these services remain permissible today.3

SLAs, RSVFP vendors, and professional associations on behalf of RSVFP vendors have sought
guidance from the Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA) regarding the use of VR

1 20 U.S.C. § 107, et seq.
2 A “State licensing agency” (SLA), as defined at 34 C.F.R. § 395.1(v), is the VR agency providing VR services to
individuals who are blind in the State under the VR services portion of the Unified or Combined State Plan (see 34
C.F.R. §§ 395.2 and 395.5) and that has been designated by the Secretary of the Department of Education to issue
licenses to individuals who are blind under the RSVFP. Therefore, when providing VR services for the benefit of
licensed blind vendors operating vending facilities under the RSVFP, there is a close administrative nexus between
the State VR agency and the SLA. Although the VR agency is solely responsible for administering the VR program
and the costs incurred under that program (34 C.F.R. § 361.13) and the SLA is responsible for administering the
RSVFP (34 C.F.R. § 395.3), this TAC uses “State VR agency” and “SLA” interchangeably throughout, depending
on which term best fits the specific content of that reference.
3 29 U.S.C. § 723(b)(1).
1

---
Page 2

program funds to support the RSVFP. Many of these inquiries concern Federal requirements
governing the “initial establishment period,” as that term is used in VR program regulations, and
allowable costs for the purchase of initial stocks and supplies and the payment of initial
operating expenses under the VR program for the benefit of vending facilities operated by
licensed blind vendors under the RSVFP. In response, RSA issues this technical assistance
circular (TAC) to clarify pertinent Federal requirements and describe flexibilities in determining
the “initial establishment period” and when “initial stocks and supplies” and “initial operating
expenses” are allowable under the VR program, authorized under Title I of the Rehabilitation
Act, for the benefit of the RSVFP. By implementing the guidance in this TAC, VR agencies,
particularly those administering VR programs serving individuals who are blind or visually
impaired, and SLAs will improve support for the RSVFP through the appropriate use of VR
program funds and, thereby, increase opportunities for individuals who are blind to obtain
competitive integrated employment and economic self-sufficiency in the RSVFP.

For reader convenience, the first-time legal citations are used in the text and footnotes, links are
included to the document referenced. The citations section of the TAC also includes links to the
legal references in this document.

BACKGROUND:

Many of the questions addressed in this TAC raise legal and operational issues that are inter-
related. Therefore, to minimize redundancy and improve clarity, the guidance below is provided
in a manner that we believe is most helpful to VR agencies and SLAs, and the licensed blind
vendors they serve, as they implement the Federal requirements governing the use of VR funds
for the purchase of initial stocks and supplies and for the payment of initial operating expenses of
vending facilities operated by licensed blind vendors under the RSVFP.

Section 103(b)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5) permit VR agencies to
use VR funds to purchase initial stocks and supplies for vending facilities4 supervised by the

State agency and operated by licensed blind vendors under the RSVFP. The VR regulations at 34
C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5) also permit VR funds to be used to pay for initial operating expenses of
these vending facilities. In allowing these costs, VR program regulations at 34 C.F.R.
§ 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and (iii) establish certain guidelines. Specifically, VR agencies may incur costs
for the purchase of initial stocks and supplies when they are “necessary for the establishment of a
new business enterprise during the initial establishment period, which may not exceed six
months (34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii)). They may also incur costs for initial operating expenses
“during the initial establishment period, which may not exceed six months” (34 C.F.R.
§ 361.49(a)(5)(iii)).

In Program Assistance Circular (PAC)-89-02, dated January 3, 1989, RSA explained that initial
stocks and supplies purchased for the benefit of the RSVFP include “all types of merchandise

4 Section 103(b)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act refers to “small business” and 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5) refers to “small
business enterprise;” however, for purposes of this TAC, the small businesses we are discussing are vending
facilities operated by licensed blind vendors under the RSVFP. It is RSA’s understanding that some States refer to
the RSVFP and Business Enterprise Program (BEP) interchangeably. For ease of the reader, we use only the RSVFP
throughout this TAC.

2

---
Page 3

necessary for the establishment of the new business enterprise. Initial stocks should be
interpreted as items purchased for the purpose of marketing to customers.” In this TAC, RSA
further clarifies that initial stocks and supplies include the initial inventory and all supplies (e.g.,
utensils, paper products, plastic ware, cups, pots and pans, disinfectants, and cleaning supplies)
necessary for the establishment of a new business enterprise by a licensed blind vendor operating
a facility under the RSVFP during the initial establishment period of that business enterprise, for
a maximum period of six months. Initial stocks and supplies purchased for the benefit of the
RSVFP are those items that meet the definition of “supplies” in the Uniform Administrative
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards at 2 C.F.R. § 200.1.5

Many of the questions addressed in this TAC relate to the six-month period allowed for the use
of VR funds to purchase initial stocks and supplies and pay for initial operating expenses of
business enterprises under the RSVFP. In this TAC, RSA provides its interpretation of these

requirements, which have advanced given the evolution of the RSVFP since it was first
introduced in connection with the VR Program in 1954.6 This guidance includes several critical
points that VR agencies and SLAs must keep in mind as they implement Federal requirements
governing the allowability of VR funds to purchase initial stocks and supplies and pay for initial
operating expenses under the VR program for the benefit of licensed blind vendors operating
vending facilities under the RSVFP.

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

VR regulations do not require that all initial stocks and supplies and initial operating expenses be
provided for the maximum six-month period. Rather, the regulations at 34 C.F.R.
§ 361.49(a)(5)(ii) permit the purchase of initial stocks and supplies that are “necessary” for the
initial establishment period of the business enterprise, “not to exceed six months.” Similarly,
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(iii) permits VR agencies to use VR funds to pay for “operational costs”
“which may not exceed six months.” The regulatory criteria afford States significant flexibility in
the administration of the VR program for the benefit of the RSVFP. While SLAs may use VR

program funds to purchase initial stocks and supplies and pay initial operating expenses during
the entire maximum six-month establishment period, for example when establishing a vending
facility for the first time, the regulations do not require an automatic six-month period for the
purchase of initial stocks and supplies and payment of initial operating expenses. A State
limiting the expenditure of Federal funds for these purposes to a specific period of time less than
6 months for all vendors in its rules and policies, has exercised this flexibility to shorten the
initial establishment period in which it is necessary for the VR agency to purchase initial stocks
and supplies and pay for initial operating expenses. States must develop written policies,
pursuant to 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(b), and must establish State RSVFP rules, with the active
participation of the Elected Committee of Blind Vendors, pursuant to 34 C.F.R. §§ 395.3 and
395.4. It is important to note that all written policies and State rules governing the use of VR

5 “Supplies” are those items that do not meet the definition of “equipment” at 2 C.F.R. § 200.1. For purposes of the
RSVFP (regardless of whether purchased with RSVFP set-aside funds or VR program funds), the per unit
acquisition cost level of equipment is the lesser of the State’s capitalization threshold or $1,000, in accordance with
an exception granted to RSA by the Office of Management and Budget on October 6, 2022. (Federal Register
Notice)
6 The R-S Act was initially enacted in 1936; however, it was amended by the Vocational Rehabilitation
Amendments of 1954, which created a nexus between the VR program and the R-S Act.

3

---
Page 4

funds for the purchase of initial stocks and supplies, or the payment of initial operating
expenditures must ensure that costs paid are consistent with requirements of the Federal cost
principles at 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through 200.405 with respect to allowability, reasonableness,
and allocability. To that end, for States whose written policies and State rules allow for agency
discretion, up to a maximum of six months (i.e., like that permitted in VR regulations at 34
C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and (iii)), VR agencies should not assume that every new licensed blind
vendor requires the maximum six months allowed by Federal regulations. In other words, the VR
agency may only expend VR funds for the purchase of initial stocks and supplies and for the
payment of initial operating expenses after determining, at a minimum –

• • The estimated number of initial stocks and supplies and the initial operating expenses
necessary for the start-up operation of the vending facility; and

• • How much time, up to the maximum six months, will the licensed blind vendor require
support in the start-up of the vending facility, thereby ensuring the expenditure of funds is
reasonable and consistent with 2 C.F.R. § 200.404 and, thus, allowable under 2 C.F.R. §
200.403.

When a cost is allowable under the VR program, including expenses related to the start-up of
vending facilities, such as initial stocks and supplies and initial operating expenses, the State
agency may use non-Federal funds to pay that cost instead of using Federal VR funds. Any non-
Federal funds7 used to purchase allowable initial stocks and supplies or pay for initial operating
expenses will count toward the State’s match and maintenance of effort requirements; therefore,
VR agencies must report these amounts as non-Federal share on the Vocational Rehabilitation
Financial Report (RSA-17), as required by 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.60 and 361.62.

The following examples clarify when VR funds may be used to purchase initial stocks and
supplies and pay for initial operating expenses for vending facilities operated under the RSVFP.

Examples:

New Licensed Blind Vendor Assumes Responsibility for Established Site that is Not
Fully Stocked:

An established vending facility is operated by Vendor A, who retires. Vendor B, another
licensed blind vendor, assumes responsibility for the vending facility while it is still
operating at a profit. As Vendor A neared retirement, the vendor only replaced the stocks
and supplies that were most popular with the customers. Other necessary inventory and
supplies became depleted. This means Vendor B needs financial assistance from the SLA
to get the inventory and supplies fully stocked again. In this example, Vendor B is
establishing a new business enterprise when they become the new licensed operator of
the vending facility once operated by Vendor A. The initial establishment period, for
purposes of 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and (iii), for Vendor B starts the first day they
assume operation of the vending facility and ends on the last day that Vendor B no longer

needs financial assistance for the start-up costs of their vending operation consistent with

7 34 C.F.R. § 395.9 does not permit the expenditure of RSVFP set-aside funds for initial stocks and supplies and
initial operating expenses.

4

---
Page 5

the State’s written policies, rules, and Federal requirements, including Federal cost
principles. In this State, the VR agency’s written policy and the SLA’s State rules for the
provision of services to licensed blind vendors allow for a maximum of six months for
both the purchase of initial stocks and supplies and for the payment of initial operating
expenses. This means that VR funds may be used to purchase initial stocks and supplies
or pay initial operating expenditures for Vendor B for no more than six months.

Initial Stocks and Supplies:

Using the analysis above, the SLA determined that Vendor B needs financial assistance
to get the vending facility fully stocked with inventory and supplies, some of which were
left depleted by Vendor A when they retired. To identify how much financial assistance
to give Vendor B, the SLA considered the amount of stocks and supplies that were

remaining and the vending facility’s operating income, thus determining the amount
necessary for the establishment of Vendor B’s business enterprise in accordance with
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii). The SLA considered the vending facility’s operating income
to determine when it would be sufficient to enable Vendor B to begin purchasing stocks
and supplies from the vending facility’s income. The SLA also consulted its RSVFP
Rules for any State rules governing the allowability of financial assistance to Vendor B.
For example, the SLA may determine that Vendor B only needs financial assistance from
VR funds to pay for initial stocks and supplies for the first two months after assuming
responsibility for the facility to bring the inventory and supplies up to an adequate
amount.

Initial Operating Expenses:

The SLA should conduct a similar analysis for initial operating expenses (e.g.,
bookkeeping services, marketing, and personnel costs). It is possible the SLA may
determine that Vendor B does not need financial assistance to pay for initial operating

expenses since the facility has been established for a long time and was operating at a
profit at Vendor A’s retirement. The SLA could determine that the vending facility’s
income generated by Vendor B will be sufficient to pay the operating costs.
Alternatively, the SLA could determine that Vendor B needs financial assistance for one
month given bills that will be due just as they take over the business, before having an
opportunity to generate income as the operator.

The SLA would use the same analyses as above, with respect to the purchase of initial
stocks and supplies and the payment of initial operating expenses, if Vendor B leaves and
Vendor C becomes the new operator of the business enterprise, thereby starting a new
“initial establishment period” for Vendor C’s operation at the vending facility. The
amount of financial assistance Vendor C would need, in terms of the number of months,
would depend on the facts that exist at that time, but not to exceed six months.

New Licensed Blind Vendor Assumes Responsibility for Established Site that is Fully
Stocked:

5

---
Page 6

Building on the example above, but changing the facts slightly, Vendor A retires and
leaves the vending facility fully stocked. Vendor B takes over the vending facility as the
new licensed blind vendor. Vendor B decides, as part of the establishment of their new
vending site, to hire additional staff so they can expand the hours of operation for the
facility. The additional staff person will work 20 hours each week. Using the analysis
described above, the VR agency may only pay for any initial stocks and supplies for
Vendor B that may be necessary for a short transitional period to accommodate bills
related to stocks and supplies that may come immediately due prior to the ability of
Vendor B to generate sufficient income by the facility to cover those bills, in accordance
with 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and the Federal cost principles at 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403
through 200.405, since Vendor A left the vending facility fully stocked when they retired.
Given that the existing vending facility Vendor B is taking over is a thriving business
operation, Vendor B will be able to replace stocks and supplies as they are depleted.

However, with the additional staff, they will incur significantly more operational costs
than Vendor A. Therefore, it would be reasonable for the VR agency to use VR funds to
pay for the salary and expenses of the additional staff person for a maximum of six
months, in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(iii) and consistent with written
policies and State rules and the Federal cost principles at 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through
200.405.

New Licensed Blind Vendor Assumes Responsibility for Established Site that is Fully
Stocked; State Rules Permit Initial Stocks and Supplies for Two Weeks:

Building on the example above, but changing the facts slightly, the State has promulgated
RSVFP rules and developed VR written policies that state every new licensed blind
vendor of a vending facility receives two weeks of initial stocks and supplies. Although
this two-week period is far less than the maximum allowed by Federal regulations with
respect to the purchase of initial stocks and supplies, the “establishment period” is within
the time allowed by Federal VR regulations in that it is less than the six-month maximum

period. As such, this shorter time is permissible under Federal VR regulations provided
the State can show that two weeks is necessary and reasonable in accordance with the
Uniform Guidance for the payment of initial stocks and supplies to all licensed blind
vendors.8 In determining the amount of initial operational expenses Vendor B needs, the
same analysis as used in Example 2 above is applicable since the State’s two-week rule in
this example only applies to initial stocks and supplies.

8 A State that sets a definite time period applicable to all licensed blind vendors for the payment of initial stocks and
supplies and initial operating expenses through VR program written policies or RSVFP State rules must demonstrate
that such time period is reasonable and necessary under the Federal cost principles at 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through
200.405. It will likely be harder for States to demonstrate that longer time periods, particularly those time periods
closer to the six-month maximum allowed under 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii), are reasonable and necessary for all
licensed blind vendors regardless of the factual circumstances of each individual vendor.

6

---
Page 7

Conversion of Vending Facility Type by Same Licensed Blind Vendor:

Vendor C has operated a thriving vending machine vending facility for many years in a
Federal office building. Vendor C now wants to convert the business operation from
vending machines to a micro market. To do so, Vendor C needs --

• (1) Various new equipment, such as refrigerator cases, shelves for dry goods, and an
electronic payment kiosk;
• (2) Electrical and plumbing work to ready the new equipment for use in the micro
market vending facility; and
• (3) Different products to stock the new equipment, which will offer a wider array of
products than the vending machines currently operated.

This State’s written VR policies and RSVFP rules establish a maximum period of six
months for the purchase of initial stocks and supplies and for the payment of initial
operating expenses.

Neither Section 103(a)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act nor 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5) set time
limits on the purchase of equipment for use in vending facilities. In other words, VR
agencies may use VR funds to acquire new or replacement equipment for use in a
vending facility at any time during the life of the vending facility. In purchasing the
equipment, costs associated with readying that equipment for use are also allowable.9
Similarly, SLAs may use RSVFP set-aside funds to purchase equipment at any time
during the life of the vending facility (34 C.F.R. § 395.9(b)(2)). Set-aside funds refer to
funds which accrue to an SLA from an assessment against the net proceeds of each
vending facility in the RSVFP and any income from vending machines on Federal
property which accrues to the State licensing agency.10

Therefore, the VR agency or SLA could use VR funds or RSVFP set-aside funds to

purchase equipment needed by Vendor C for the conversion of the facility from vending
machines to a micro market; allowable costs for the acquisition of the equipment could
include costs for readying the space to meet the installation requirements. There is no
time limit for the purchase of such equipment; however, the equipment and associated
installation costs must be reasonable and necessary in accordance with the Uniform
Guidance.

In addition to the equipment, Vendor C also needs to purchase a broader range of
inventory to be sold in the micro market, as well as additional supplies. These costs will
be substantially higher than Vendor C incurs monthly in their current vending facility.
Although their current vending machine business operation is profitable, it is not enough
to sustain a larger scale micro market enterprise. In this example, the change in business

9 “Acquisition costs” means the cost of the asset (i.e., the equipment), including the cost to ready the asset for its
intended use (2 C.F.R. § 200.1). For example, acquisition costs for refrigerator cases would include the purchase
price of the equipment, as well as any electrical, plumbing, or drywall work necessary for the installation of the
refrigerator cases.
10 24 C.F.R. § 395.1(s).

7

---
Page 8

operation from a vending machine facility to a micro market vending facility constitutes a
new business enterprise under the RSVFP for Vendor C for purposes of 34 C.F.R.
§ 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and (iii). Therefore, the first day of operation as a micro market would
begin the start of the “initial establishment period” for Vendor C. As such, the VR agency
may use VR funds to purchase initial stocks and supplies for Vendor C’s micro market
that are necessary for the establishment period for a maximum of six months and
consistent with written policies and State RSVFP rules, as well as the Federal cost
principles at 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through 200.405.

The VR agency must consider the extent of the change in inventory and supplies that are
necessitated by the conversion. Depending on how extensive the inventory offered by
Vendor C in their vending machines is, they may not need to expand very much.
However, as vending machine inventory is usually quite limited, a more significant

expansion of inventory likely is necessary when converting to a micro market. These are
the facts the VR agency must consider when determining how many months of initial
stocks and supplies are necessary to provide using VR funds to Vendor C consistent with
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and written policies and State RSVFP rules.

RSA recognizes that this interpretation is different than what is stated in PAC-89-02,
issued 35 years ago, which states: “In a major expansion of a vending facility location or
a change in the nature of the facility (such as changing a dry facility to a vending
machine facility or snack bar) new items not previously carried on the stock inventory but
now considered necessary or desirable for the location can’t be considered initial stock.”
Considering current Federal requirements, both in 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5) and the
Federal cost principles at 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through 200.405, particularly section
200.404,11 RSA has concluded that our current position here in Example 4 is more
consistent with the plain meaning of the statute and regulations and reasonably reflects
evolving market trends where vendors can sell a wide variety of articles using modern
technology. We believe a conversion from one type of vending facility to another is a

significant change in the business operation, and, with each such change in the business
operation of the facility, a new “initial establishment period” starts, as contemplated by
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and (iii) since these provisions are not tied specifically to the
“acquisition“ of vending facilities and equipment that is described more generally in
Section 103(b)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5). This means
with each such change, the VR agency could use VR funds to pay for initial stocks and
supplies for a maximum of six months to the extent such purchases are “necessary” in
accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii).

In this example, Vendor C may also incur higher operational costs in operating the micro
market than they did operating the vending machines facility. The first day that Vendor C
begins operating the micro market starts the initial establishment period for that micro
market business enterprise. Given the anticipated significant higher operational costs, the
VR agency may find it necessary and reasonable that Vendor C requires financial

11 2.C.F.R. § 200.404 states, in pertinent part, “[a] cost is reasonable if, in its nature and amount, it does not exceed
that which would be incurred by a prudent person under the circumstances prevailing at the time the decision was
made to incur the cost.”

8

---
Page 9

assistance for the maximum period of six months to get the micro market operational.
RSA believes, under these facts, these costs would be allowable under the VR program at
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(iii) and would be consistent with the Federal cost principles at
2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through 200.405.

Licensed Blind Vendor Reimbursement to the SLA for Initial Stocks and Supplies:

Vendor D is assigned to be the licensed blind vendor of a micro market, a new vending
facility at a Federal office building. The SLA purchased the initial stocks and supplies for
the micro market for the full six months establishment period, consistent with written VR
policies and RSVFP State rules, because it was a new vending facility. The total cost of
the initial stocks and supplies for the six-month period was $18,000; the SLA used VR
funds to pay the full amount of the cost initially. The State’s rules and regulations permit

the SLA to seek reimbursement for the value of the initial stocks and supplies from
Vendor D over a two-year period.

To be designated as the SLA to administer the RSVFP, the State must provide suitable
vending facility equipment and adequate initial stocks to the licensed blind vendor and
have policies addressing how the SLA will meet this requirement (Section 107(b)(2) of
the R-S Act and 34 C.F.R. § 395.3(a)(5)). The equipment and stocks may be owned by
the SLA or by the licensed blind vendor, and State policies vary in how they implement
this requirement. States may determine the right, title to, and interest in a vending facility,
its equipment or inventory may be vested in the licensed blind vendor. States must ensure
that the requirements of 34 C.F.R. § 395.6 are satisfied, including, among other things,
the requirement to enter into a written agreement with the licensed blind vendor that
covers specific terms and conditions consistent with the State’s regulations, 34 C.F.R.
part 395, and the permit for the vending facility. If State rules12 do not contain these
provisions, the State must submit proposed rule revisions to RSA for approval before
implementing such policies in the State.

Some State rules and regulations require the SLA to ensure the vending facility is fully
stocked at the time the initial licensed blind vendor and all successor licensed blind
vendors take over the operation of the vending facility, but require the existing and
successor licensed blind vendors, in accordance with State RSVFP rules and regulations,
to reimburse the SLA for some or all of the cost of that initial stocks and supplies over a
set period of time (e.g., two years). Such reimbursements would be considered refunds
for fiscal accounting purposes by the VR agency and, as such, would not constitute
program income13 to the VR program as that term is defined at 34 C.F.R. § 361.63 and 2
C.F.R. § 200.1. Specifically, the payments of these costs by a licensed blind vendor do

12 TAC-22-01: RSA Approval of State Rules.
13 This TAC is drafted with the assumption that the initial stocks and supplies at issue, and thus the subject of a
reimbursement policy, were paid with either Federal VR grant funds or non-Federal funds used for matching
purposes under the VR program. As stated herein, any repayments for the initial stocks and supplies would
constitute a refund and not program income. However, if the VR agency used program income to purchase the initial
stocks and supplies initially, the repayment of those costs would be considered a refund of program income to the
State VR agency in the Federal fiscal year received for reporting and accounting purposes; as such, these refunds
must be used for allowable VR program purposes as was true when the program income was first earned.

9

---
Page 10

not constitute income earned by the agency but rather direct repayments of the costs
incurred, thereby putting these payments outside the scope of “program income” as that
term is defined. The refund of Federal funds must be applied, for accounting and
reporting purposes, to the Federal fiscal year from which the initial cost expenditure was
made.

With this type of reimbursement, Vendor D would own the dollar value of the initial
stocks and supplies equal to the amount Vendor D paid to the SLA in accordance with the
written agreement consistent with the requirements of 34 C.F.R. § 395.6. In such an
arrangement, when Vendor D leaves the vending facility, they would be able to take the
value (i.e., $18,000 or applicable pro rata share of that full amount) of initial stocks and
supplies with them and, in turn, the SLA would re-stock the vending facility with initial
stocks and supplies for the successor licensed blind vendor during the “initial

establishment period” of their business operation of that micro market vending facility for
a period not to exceed six months pursuant to 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and consistent
with the VR agency’s written policies developed pursuant to 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(b) and
the State’s RSVFP rules promulgated in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 395.4. The SLA
could also purchase the stocks from Vendor D as part of the costs associated with the
“initial establishment period” for the successor licensed blind vendor. Because a
reimbursement arrangement is contemplated by the R-S Act when it recognizes that
either the SLA or licensed blind vendor can own the initial stocks and supplies as just
described, RSA would not consider this arrangement a “loan” to Vendor D for purposes
of the VR program or the RSVFP.

Initial Stocks and Supplies Provided Through an Individualized Plan for Employment
(IPE):

Vendor E is a VR program participant, with a signed IPE, whose chosen employment
outcome goal is to operate a small business. After much counseling, the individual and

VR counselor agree that becoming a licensed blind vendor under the RSVFP is a good
option for Vendor E. After satisfying the requirements for becoming a licensed blind
vendor with individualized VR services from the VR program, Vendor E is assigned to
an existing vending machine facility at a Federal office building. The vending facility has
not had an assigned licensed blind vendor for an extended period due to low numbers of
Federal employees in the office. The inventory for the vending machines was completely
exhausted at the start of Vendor E’s “initial establishment period” of their business
operation. Vendor E’s IPE includes six months of initial stocks and supplies for the
vending machines pursuant to Section 103(a)(12) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R.
§ 361.48(b)(16). The VR agency’s written policies for the provision of services to
individuals starting a small business under an IPE, in accordance with 34 C.F.R.
§ 361.50, permit the VR agency to purchase initial stocks and supplies, as necessary, for
a maximum start-up period of six months. In this example, the State has made the
decision through its written policies that it will provide initial stocks and supplies for VR
participants starting a small business under an IPE up to a maximum of six months to

10

---
Page 11

mirror Federal requirements governing the purchase of initial stocks and supplies under
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii).

When Vendor E advanced to a new vending location, the SLA assigned Vendor F to the
Federal office building’s vending machine vending facility. Vendor F is not a VR
program participant and does not have an approved IPE. The inventory was fully stocked
at Vendor E’s departure. The SLA agreed to add one more vending machine to the
facility which needed to be stocked when Vendor F took over the operation of the
facility. Given the thriving nature of this vending facility, as part of the “initial
establishment period”, the SLA determined it was necessary to only pay for three months
of initial stocks and supplies for Vendor F’s new vending machine in accordance with
34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and the Federal cost principles at 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403
through 200.405.

The SLA’s determination of the amount of financial assistance Vendor F needed for the
new vending machine is consistent with its State rules and Federal regulations at 34
C.F.R. § 361.49(b), which permit the purchase of initial stocks and supplies for a period
not to exceed six months, and the Federal cost principles in terms of what a reasonable
person would do under the circumstances. The SLA used VR funds to pay the costs of
these initial stocks and supplies since such costs are not allowable with RSVFP set-aside
funds; however, since Vendor F is not a VR program participant, the services were
provided pursuant to Section 103(b)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R.
§ 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and not under an IPE. As such, the services provided must be
consistent with the agency’s written policies for the provision of such services, developed
pursuant to 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(b), and consistent with the State’s RSVFP rules
developed in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 395.4, both of which permit the purchase of
initial stocks and supplies for a maximum period of six months for purposes of this
example.

With both Vendor E and Vendor F, VR funds are used to pay for the same type of
services, namely initial stocks and supplies. The difference is that Vendor E is a VR
program participant and Vendor F is not. As a VR program participant, neither the
Rehabilitation Act nor its regulations specifically limit the provision of initial stocks and
supplies under an IPE to a maximum of six months, as it does for the provision of initial
stocks and supplies in the context of services to groups (i.e., to those who are not VR
participants, such as Vendor F). However, if States opt to provide initial stocks and
supplies for small business enterprises under either an IPE or as a service to groups, State
VR agencies must develop written policies and procedures regarding the nature and scope
of those services. Written policies for the provision of services to VR program
participants under an IPE, including those related to initial stocks and supplies, must be
developed in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 361.50; those governing the provision of
services to licensed blind vendors who are not VR program participants under an IPE
must be developed in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(b). In developing and
implementing these policies, the State agency must satisfy the requirements of the
Federal cost principles at 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.403 through 200.405, and particularly §

200.404 with respect to reasonableness, to ensure allowability of those costs.

11

---
Page 12

For purposes of this example, it is important to note that the term “vocational
rehabilitation services”14 includes both individualized VR services provided to VR
program participants under an approved IPE, pursuant to Section 103(a) of the
Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.48(b), and VR services to groups provided
pursuant to Section 103(b) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a), including
those provided to licensed blind vendors operating a vending facility under the RSVFP.
In considering the provision of VR services to licensed blind vendors, such as Vendor E
and Vendor F, it will be necessary for the State agency to determine whether the licensed
blind vendor has been determined eligible for Supplemental Security Income (SSI) or
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI). Pursuant to 34 C.F.R. § 361.54(b)(3)(ii), the
VR agency may not impose a financial need test or require the financial participation of
any individual who has been determined eligible for SSI or SSDI as a condition of

furnishing any VR services. For purposes of this example, the initial stocks and supplies
provided to Vendor E and Vendor F are “VR services," as that term is defined. This
means that the State agency may not impose a financial needs test or require the financial
participation for either Vendor E or Vendor F as a condition for receiving the initial
stocks and supplies if they have been determined eligible for SSI or SSDI.

Although the financial need and financial participation restriction of 34 C.F.R.
§ 361.54(b)(3)(ii) applies to any VR service, which includes both individualized services
and services to groups (34 C.F.R. § 361.5(c)(57)), the R-S Act and its regulations
contemplate the possibility that the licensed blind vendor could own vending facilities,
and thus could be expected to reimburse the cost of initial stocks and supplies for
ownership to transfer from the SLA to the licensed blind vendor (34 C.F.R. § 395.6). It is
important to give meaning to the R-S Act’s provisions, which are separate and distinct
from the VR program, and to recognize the fact that the VR funds are used under Section
103((a)(12) or 103(b)(1) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.48(b)(16) or
361.49(a)(5) to benefit the RSVFP and not the VR program. Thus, we believe that the

financial need restriction of 34 C.F.R. § 361.54 is not implicated when an SLA is
requiring payment from the licensed blind vendor of Federal VR funds paid for the
benefit of licensed blind vendors operating a vending facility under the RSVFP in
exchange for transfer of ownership from the SLA to the licensed blind vendor, regardless
of whether they are recipients of SSI or SSDI. The financial needs test or financial
participation of VR participants described in 34 C.F.R. § 361.54 contemplates the
participant’s personal income as a basis for the level of financial assistance that the VR
agency agrees to provide on the signed IPE. However, the R-S Act contemplates the
possibility that licensed blind vendors will be given an opportunity to own the equipment
or stocks and supplies. In such an arrangement, the repayment of the cost to the SLA
would be paid out of the vending facility’s operating budget, not the licensed blind
vendor’s personal income. Therefore, any such repayment is not considered a financial
participation for purposes of 34 C.F.R. § 361.54. As noted previously in this TAC, the

14 “Vocational rehabilitation services” is defined at Section (7)(40) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 C.F.R. §
361.5(c)(57).

12

---
Page 13

repayment of these initial stocks and supplies is also not considered a loan to the licensed
blind vendor because this repayment scheme is contemplated under the R-S Act.

SUMMARY:

A change from one type of vending facility to another or one licensed blind vendor to another is
a change in the business operation; and, with each change in the business operation of the
facility, a new “initial establishment period” is considered to start for purposes of the VR
program requirements at 34 C.F.R. § 361.49(a)(5)(ii) and (iii). However, to be clear, the mere
fact that a new establishment period starts does not necessarily mean VR funds must be used to
pay for initial start-up costs. With respect to initial stocks and supplies, the SLA must determine
whether conversion from one facility type to another or from one licensed blind vendor to
another makes the purchase of such stocks and supplies necessary and, if so, for what time

period. With respect to initial operating expenses, the SLA must also determine whether the
payment of such is necessary and reasonable, in accordance with Federal cost principles, for the
establishment period under a new licensed blind vendor or of the newly converted vending
facility, as determined by State written policies and RSVFP rules. Furthermore, the VR agency’s
actions must be consistent with its written policies and procedures for the expenditure of VR
funds for the RSVFP, in accordance with 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.49(b)(1) and 361.50; and the SLA’s
expenditure of funds must be consistent with its State rules and regulations governing the
RSVFP, in accordance with 34 C.F.R. § 395.4.

Any non-Federal funds used to purchase allowable initial stocks and supplies or pay for initial
operational expenses will count toward the State’s match and maintenance of effort requirements
and must be reported as non-Federal share on the Vocational Rehabilitation Financial Report
(RSA-17).

EFFECTIVE DATE: Upon issuance.

INQUIRIES:

David Steele, Chief
Fiscal Unit
David.Steele@ed.gov

CITATIONS:

Rehabilitation Act of 1973

Randolph-Sheppard Act

State Vocational Rehabilitation Services Program Regulations 34 C.F.R. §§ 361.5(c)(57),
361.13(c), 361.48(b)(16), 361.49(a)(5) and (b)(1), 361.50, 361.54(b)(3)(ii), 361.60, 361.62,
361.63

13

---
Page 14

Randolph-Sheppard Vending Facilities Program Regulations at 34 C.F.R. §§ 395.1, 395.2,
395.3(a)(5), 395.4, 395.5, 395.6, 395.9(b)(2)

Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal
Awards Regulations at 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.1, 200.403 through 200.405

Program Assistance Circular 89-02 (January 3, 1989)

/s/
Danté Q. Allen

Commissioner

cc: Counsel of State Administrators of Vocational Rehabilitation
National Council of State Agencies for the Blind
National Association of Blind Merchants

14