tac-12-03

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND
REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20202-2800

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CIRCULAR
RSA-TAC-12-03
DATE: April 16, 2012

ADDRESSEES: STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AGENCIES
STATE REHABILITATION COUNCILS

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & CONTINUING
EDUCATION CENTERS
AMERICAN INDIAN VOCATIONAL
REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
CLIENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS
CONSUMER ADVOCACY ORGANIZATIONS

SUBJECT: Organizational Structure and Non-Delegable Responsibilities of the
Designated State Unit for the Vocational Rehabilitation Program

PURPOSE: Through this technical assistance circular (TAC), the Rehabilitation
Services Administration (RSA) provides guidance on the federal
requirements governing the organizational structure of, and the non-
delegable responsibilities to be performed by, the designated State unit
• (DSU) for the vocational rehabilitation (VR) program, authorized under
Title I, Part B, of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended

(Rehabilitation Act). RSA has determined that clarification of the relevant
statutory and regulatory provisions is needed in light of inquiries from VR
agencies and the results of its recent monitoring activities.

The guidance contained in this TAC covers each of the federal
requirements and further explains:

• • the meaning of the term “other rehabilitation” for the purpose of
satisfying the organizational requirements for the DSU within the
designated State agency (DSA);
• • the calculation used to determine the percentage of DSU staff
required to perform the vocational or other rehabilitation work of
the DSU;
• • factors to consider when determining if the DSU is located at a

level comparable to other major components of the DSA; and
• • additional factors related to the assessment of the DSU’s ability to
perform its non-delegable responsibilities.

---
Page 2

This TAC retires prior guidance issued through RSA-PI-75-31, RSA
Policy Statement on Interpretation of State VR Organizational
Requirements of the Rehabilitation Act as amended, June 3, 1975; RSA-
PI-77-26, RSA Policy Statement of Interpretation of State VR
Organizational Requirements of the Rehabilitation Act, as amended July
26, 1977 (addendum to RSA-75-31); and RSA-PD-96-02, Special
Education Programs as "Other Rehabilitation" for Purposes of the
Application of the Provisions of Sections 101(a)(1)(B)(i) and (2)(A)(i) of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, November 7, 1995. These prior
issuances contained outdated citations, described regulations that are no
longer in effect, or included information that is restated in explanatory
guidance to current regulations. However, any still valid statements of

policy found in these older issuances are incorporated in this TAC.

FEDERAL
REQUIREMENTS: Since 1920, when the VR program was first authorized under the Smith-
Fess Act, federal requirements governing the organizational requirements
for the VR program have changed significantly. The Smith-Fess Act
required that the VR program be administered by State Boards of
Vocational Education. The 1954 amendments to the Vocational
Rehabilitation Act (VR Act), the authorizing federal legislation for the VR
program at that time, created another organizational structure option for
States in administering the VR program. Specifically, those amendments
permitted the VR program to be administered by a state agency that was
primarily concerned with VR and other rehabilitation. In other words, an
independent state agency could be established to administer the VR
program and other programs for individuals with disabilities.

The 1965 Amendments to the VR Act contained the last significant change

in the statutory provisions related to the state administration and
organization of the VR program. In response to a perceived need for
greater flexibility at the state level, the 1965 Amendments also allowed the
VR program to be administered by a state agency that contained at least
two other units administering a program of education, health, welfare, or
labor. Congress clearly intended to achieve a balance between state
flexibility in the administration of the VR program, while at the same time
preserving the integrity and autonomy of the program by imposing the
organizational unit requirements described below, which were
subsequently incorporated into the Rehabilitation Act and have been
maintained since that time.

Section 101(a)(2)(A) of the Rehabilitation Act and its implementing
regulations at 34 CFR 361.13(a) require that the VR State Plan shall
designate a state agency as the sole state agency to administer the plan.
The state agency designated to administer the VR State Plan must be

---
Page 3

either: 1) a state agency primarily concerned with VR, or VR and other
rehabilitation, of individuals with disabilities; or 2) a state agency that
includes a VR bureau, division or other organizational unit (Section
101(a)(2)(B) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR 361.13(a)).

If the state agency contains a VR bureau, division or other organizational
unit, Section 101(a)(2)(B)(ii) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR
361.13(b) require that the VR bureau, division or VR organizational unit
must:

• • be primarily concerned with VR, or VR and other rehabilitation, of
individuals with disabilities, and be responsible for the VR

program of the DSA;
• • be administered by a full-time director;
• • employ staff on the rehabilitation work of the organizational unit
all or substantially all of whom devote their full time to such work;
and
• • be located at an organizational level and have an organizational
status within the DSA comparable to that of other major
organizational units of the DSA.

In addition, regulations found at 34 CFR 361.13(c) require that certain
functions be reserved solely to the staff of the DSU and that these
functions may not be delegated to any other agency or individual (34 CFR
361.13(c)(2)). At a minimum, these “non-delegable” responsibilities

relate to decisions affecting:

• • eligibility, the nature and scope of services, and the provision of
those services (34 CFR 361.13(c)(1)(i));
• • the determination that individuals have achieved employment
outcomes (34 CFR 361.13(c)(1)(ii));
• • policy formulation and implementation (34 CFR 361.13(c)(1)(iii));
• • the allocation and expenditure of VR funds (34 CFR
361.13(c)(1)(iv)); and
• • the participation of the DSU in the one-stop service delivery
system in accordance with Title I of the Workforce Investment Act

• (WIA) and the regulatory requirements specified in 20 CFR Part
662 (34 CFR 361.13(c)(1)(v)).

TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE: Although RSA can best determine whether a state is complying with the
organizational requirements for the DSU and DSA through the conduct of
monitoring (Final Regulations 62 Fed. Reg. 6308, 6316 (February 11,
1997)), it is important that state officials and personnel responsible for the
administration of the VR program understand each federal requirement to
ensure that the state has in fact created the proper organizational structure

---
Page 4

that enables the DSU to exercise its non-delegable responsibilities for the
VR program. Therefore, in an effort to assist States outside of the
monitoring process, this TAC first provides guidance on each of the
organizational requirements and then addresses the non-delegable
responsibilities of the DSU.

Administration of the VR Program and “Other Rehabilitation”

The DSA or the DSU, in those States where there is a DSU, must be
primarily concerned with VR, or VR and other rehabilitation, of
individuals with disabilities (Section 101(a)(2)(B) of the Rehabilitation
Act and 34 CFR 361.13(a)(1) and (b)(1)(i)). According to these
requirements, the primary function of the DSA or the DSU, if one exists,

must be the delivery of VR or VR and other rehabilitation services to
individuals with disabilities.

Although the statute and regulations permit the DSA or the DSU to
administer programs other than the VR program that assist with the
rehabilitation of individuals with disabilities, the relevant provisions
themselves neither define nor describe the meaning of the term “other
rehabilitation.” However, the preamble to the 1997 final VR program
regulations clarifies that “other rehabilitation” “includes, but is not limited
to, other programs that provide medical, psychological, educational, or
social services to individuals with disabilities” (Final Regulations 62 Fed.
Reg. 6308, 6316 (February 11, 1997)). The preamble to the Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) for these final regulations also contains
examples of programs or services that constitute “other rehabilitation,”
including independent living services, programs for individuals with
developmental disabilities, services for individuals who are deaf or

hearing-impaired, services for individuals who are blind or visually
impaired, Social Security disability determinations, or another type of
program related to individuals with disabilities (NPRM 60 Fed. Reg.
64476, 64481 (December 15, 1995)).

In light of this regulatory guidance, the determination whether programs
located within, or services provided by, the DSU constitute “other
rehabilitation” for purposes of the VR organizational requirements is
dependent on the provision of services or supports provided by those other
programs to individuals with disabilities, as well as the linkage between
those services and supports and the VR program. For instance, a DSU
may be located within a DSA that provides human services. Although the
concept of “other rehabilitation” is very broad as described above, not all
human services can be considered to come within its scope. For example,
the provision of medical, psychiatric, or social services to individuals with
developmental disabilities, mental illness, or with alcohol and drug

addictions would fall within the scope of “other rehabilitation” because the

---
Page 5

primary purpose of those services is to benefit individuals with
disabilities. On the other hand, the provision of other types of human
services, such as those for the aging, child welfare, child care licensing,
and crisis/emergency response would not fall within the scope of “other
rehabilitation” for purposes of the VR organizational requirements
because the primary focus of each of these programs is not the provision
of VR or other rehabilitation services to individuals with disabilities. The
fact that these programs may, on occasion, benefit individuals with
disabilities, does not alter the fact that the primary focus of these programs
is to benefit a wider population.

Consequently, the DSU must determine the primary purpose of the other
programs that fall within its purview to ascertain if those programs

constitute “other rehabilitation” within the meaning of VR organizational
requirements. Only then can the DSU ensure that substantially all of its
staff are engaged in the provision of VR or other rehabilitation services,
despite the inclusion of these other human service programs under its
purview. As explained further below, an understanding of whether the
scope of the programming administered by the DSA or DSU, if one exists,
indicates that it is primarily responsible for the provision of VR and other
rehabilitation services is critical for determining if all, or substantially all,
of the DSU’s staff are employed full-time on the VR and other
rehabilitation work of the unit.

Full-Time Director

Section 101(a)(2)(B)(ii)(II) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR
361.13(b)(1)(ii) require that the DSU, if one has been established within a
larger DSA, employ a full-time director. Pursuant to this requirement, the

DSU director must devote his or her full time to the work of the DSU,
which would include the VR program and any other program under the
purview of the DSU. While the director is not required to devote his or
her full time to the VR component of the DSU’s work, title I funds must
be used only to support the work of the director as it relates to the VR
program.

Although this statutory and regulatory provision is as important to the
proper organizational structure and administration of the VR program, its
language is clear and RSA has received no inquiries or encountered any
issues of non-compliance during the monitoring process with respect to its
implementation. Thus, no further explanation or guidance concerning this
specific requirement is warranted at this time.

---
Page 6

Staff Performing VR or Other Rehabilitation Work

The DSU, where one exists, must have “a staff employed on the
rehabilitation work of the organizational unit all or substantially all of
whom are employed full time on such work” (Section 101(a)(2)(B)(ii)(III)
of the Rehabilitation Act). VR program regulations clarify the meaning of
“substantially all” by requiring that the DSU have “a staff, at least 90
percent of whom are employed full time on the rehabilitation work of the
organizational unit” (34 CFR 361.13(b)(1)(iii)).

The Rehabilitation Act recognizes the state’s flexibility regarding the
manner in which it organizes the DSU and allows for the centralization of
its administrative functions. Nonetheless, it remains consistent and clear

that the DSA and the DSU, if one exists in the state, must be primarily
concerned with the VR or VR and other rehabilitation needs of individuals
with disabilities. Although the work of the DSU can encompass activities
that extend beyond VR and other rehabilitation, the Rehabilitation Act and
the VR implementing regulations prescribe that "all or substantially all
staff" – e.g., 90 percent -- of the DSU must devote their full time to the
rehabilitation work of the unit, i.e., VR or vocational and other
rehabilitation. This intention is further supported by guidance contained
in the preamble to the 1995 NPRM, which reads as follows:

This requirement means that if the organizational unit
provides other rehabilitation services, in addition to
vocational rehabilitation, the 90 percent staffing requirement
applies to all unit staff providing rehabilitation services, not
to just the vocational rehabilitation staff (NPRM 60 Fed. Reg.
64476, 64481 (December 15, 1995)).

In other words, no more than ten percent of the DSU staff can devote any
portion of their time to other programs and activities carried out by the
DSU that do not constitute VR or other rehabilitation, as described above.

To determine that the DSU employs a staff at least 90 percent of whom are
working full-time on the rehabilitation work of the unit, RSA considers the
entire DSU, as defined by the state in the VR State Plan, and all of its
activities. RSA then determines which of those activities constitute the
VR and other rehabilitation of individuals with disabilities. Once this
determination is made, RSA then takes into account the total staff
employed by the DSU and the manner in which they are apportioned to
each of the DSU’s activities to determine the percentage that work full-
time on the rehabilitation work of the DSU, as opposed to the percentage
that are engaged, full- or part-time, on the non-rehabilitation work, if any,
of the DSU.

---
Page 7

The Federal requirement refers to 90 percent of the staff, not 90 percent of
the staff’s work hours, that must be devoted to the performance of matters
related to VR or the other rehabilitation work of the DSU. This distinction
is important when considering DSU staff who expend any time working
on the provision of services or activities that do not constitute VR or other
rehabilitation, such as universal and core service activities within
Workforce Centers. The DSU must maintain careful time distribution
records for any staff, again no more than ten percent, who spend any time
working on matters that are not related to the VR or other rehabilitation
work of the DSU. These time records are essential to ensure that this
requirement is satisfied, as well as compliance with cost allocation
requirements under the federal cost principles found at 2 CFR Part 225.

For example, a DSU’s staff may be co-located in the state’s one-stop
centers and it may meet its cost sharing obligations, in part, by paying for
a proportionate share of the reception services provided by one-stop staff,
or by assigning DSU staff to perform reception duties while again
ensuring that the time of these staff is properly allocated to the VR
program. Because the receptionists in the one-stop centers perform
“universal” activities for all individuals served by the centers, not only
individuals with disabilities, they cannot be considered to be engaged in
the provision of VR or other rehabilitation services. Therefore, if the DSU
chooses to assign its staff to assist with the reception duties at the one-stop
centers, it must be careful that the number of staff assigned to these or
other such duties, even on a part-time basis do not exceed ten percent of
its total staff.

Furthermore, RSA recognizes that staffing of a state agency is a dynamic
process in which the number of staff or full-time equivalent (FTE)

positions can change on a frequent basis. In an environment where
funding may be limited, it is not uncommon for hiring freezes and budget
concerns to result in vacant FTE positions that may not be filled or that
may be eliminated. Consequently, when reviewing a DSU’s compliance
with this requirement, RSA only considers staff who are actively
employed at a specific point during the review and does not consider
vacant positions or FTEs assigned to the DSU, as those positions are not
actively contributing to the provision of VR or other rehabilitation services
within the DSU. The language of Section 101(a)(2)(B)(ii)(III) and the
regulations at 34 CFR 361.13(b)(1)(iii) supports this approach through the
use of such words as “staff” and “employed.” Additionally, when
discussing this requirement, the preambles to both the 1995 NPRM (60
Fed. Reg. 64475, 64481(December 15, 1995)) and the 1997 Final
Regulations (62 Fed. Reg. 6307, 6316 (February 11, 1997)) refer to “all
unit staff providing rehabilitation services” (emphasis added). Therefore,
when making the determination that a DSU is in compliance with the

requirement that 90 percent of its staff work full-time on VR or other

---
Page 8

rehabilitation activities, only staff actually employed by the unit will be
taken into consideration.

Finally, some DSUs include within their structures community
rehabilitation programs (CRP) that employ both staff who provide
rehabilitation services to individuals with disabilities and staff who engage
solely in the production and manufacturing activities of the CRP. When
determining whether substantially all of the DSU’s staff are engaged full-
time in the provision of VR and other rehabilitation services, only those
individuals employed within the CRP who provide rehabilitation services
are considered to be performing VR or other rehabilitation activities, and
not those individuals engaged in its production work.

Organizational Level and Status of the DSU

Section 101(a)(2)(B)(ii)(IV) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR
361.13(b)(1)(iv) require that the DSU, where one exists, must be “located
at an organizational level and [have] an organizational status within the
designated State agency comparable to that of other major organizational
units of the designated State agency.” This particular requirement has
remained unchanged since its inclusion in the 1965 amendments to the VR
Act and, along with the other requirements discussed above, affirms a
cardinal principle concerning the organization of the VR program – that
the VR program is an integral categorical program, not to be merged with
other organizations of state government.

The requirement that the DSU be located at a level and have a status
comparable to that of the other major units of the DSA, in effect, places
constraints upon the alternatives available to the State in designating an

agency to administer the VR program. As clearly articulated in the
Congressional Oversight Hearings of November 30 and December 10,
1973, the objective of these constraints is to prevent the submersion of the
VR program within the structure of the DSA, which could reduce the
program’s scope and effectiveness. The requirements have been
consistently interpreted to mean that the VR unit must have clear, direct
supervision of VR staff with regard to program policy, operations, and
related program matters.

When evaluating whether the DSU is at a comparable level to other major
organizational units within the DSA, it has been the long-standing policy
of RSA that such an evaluation will take into consideration such factors
as:

• • the directness of the reporting line from the VR director to the head

of the DSA;

---
Page 9

• • the title, status, and grade of the VR director, as compared with
those of the heads of other organizational units within the DSA;
• • the extent to which the VR director can determine the scope and
policies of the VR program; and
• • the kind and degree of authority delegated to the director of the
DSU for the administration of the VR program.

Each of these factors should be considered when determining if the DSU
is located at a level comparable to other major units of the DSA, and not

submerged within the organizational structure of the DSA to such an
extent that the DSU director is limited in his or her ability to have input
into legislative and other matters affecting the VR program in a manner
that is more restricted than that of other directors of comparable programs.
However, with respect to the consideration of the title, status, and pay
grade of the DSU director, RSA has not historically been involved in
providing direction to the states regarding personnel matters, except as
they relate to the requirements for a comprehensive system of personnel
development. Absent a functional impact, differences in title, status and
pay grade between the DSU director and other directors in the DSA may
not raise concerns in connection with the federal requirements at Section
101(a)(2)(B)(ii)(IV) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR
361.13(b)(1)(iv). On the other hand, if such differences reflect a
devaluation of the DSU, this factor should be considered, along with the
others mentioned herein, to determine the state’s compliance with the
federal organizational requirements for the DSU and the ability of the
DSU to carry out the non-delegable responsibilities specified in 34 CFR

361.13(c).

Ideally the DSU director reports directly to the head of the DSA.
However, given the complexity of some state government structures, the
head of the DSA may find it necessary to require that the DSU director
report to a deputy within his or her office instead. Such an organizational
structure is permissible within the requirements of Section
101(a)(2)(B)(ii)(IV) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR
361.13(b)(1)(iv), so long as the DSU director and the directors of the other
major components are treated similarly. Under such arrangements, the
deputy within the DSA’s office typically functions as a conduit of
information and facilitator of communication between the DSU director
and the head of the DSA, as well as with the heads of the other major
units.

Unlike the above-described organizational structure, some state

government structures include a level of organization outside the head of
the DSA’s office that incorporates the DSU within its own structure, thus
creating an additional organizational layer between the head of the DSA
and the DSU. While additional organizational layers between the DSA

---
Page 10

and the DSU may be permissible, their presence can complicate the
determination of the proper placement of the DSU. When evaluating this
intervening organizational level in light of the factors listed above,
especially that of the directness of communication between the head of the
DSA and the DSU director, RSA considers the role of the head of the
intervening organization in terms of the administration of the VR and
other programs located within the intervening level. Specifically, RSA
considers whether this individual’s role interferes with the DSU director’s
ability to perform the non-delegable functions listed at 34 CFR 361.13(c).
For example, RSA will examine the involvement of the head of the
intervening organization in decisions related to legislative, budget,
strategic planning, policy development, and the allocation of resources
(including staff) of the VR program, particularly as compared to the

involvement of the heads of intervening levels in matters administered by
the directors of other major components within the DSA. Under
circumstances where the DSU director does not provide input on such
matters directly to the head of the DSA, but rather does so through the
head of the intervening organization, RSA will consider whether the input
provided by the VR director is marginalized prior to being transmitted to
the head of the DSA. The marginalization of such input could have a
negative affect on the ability of the DSU director to carry out the non-
delegable responsibilities for the VR program set forth at 34 CFR
361.13(c).

In summary, RSA considers many factors when analyzing whether the
DSU is located at a level comparable to other major components within
the DSA. Except for the factor pertaining to the VR director’s ability to
carry out the non-delegable functions required by 34 CFR 361.13(c), none
of these factors are dispositive on their own. Instead, they all work

together to help RSA determine whether the organizational structure
established by the state meets the spirit and intent of the federal
requirements.

Non-Delegable Responsibilities

As stated earlier in this TAC, Section 101(a)(2)(B)(ii)(I) of the
Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR 361.13(b)(1)(i) require that the DSU be
responsible for the administration of the VR program. The statute does
not describe the nature and scope of this responsibility or how it is to be
carried out by the DSU. However, the VR program implementing
regulations, found at 34 CFR 361.13(c)(1), require that certain functions
be reserved solely to the staff of the DSU and that these functions may not
be delegated to any other agency or individual (34 CFR 361.13(c)(2)).
These “non-delegable” functions relate to decisions affecting:

---
Page 11

• • eligibility, the nature and scope of services, and the provision of
those services;
• • the determination that individuals have achieved employment
outcomes;
• • policy formulation and implementation;
• • allocation and expenditure of VR funds; and
• • participation in the One-Stop service delivery system in

accordance with Title I of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA)
and the regulatory requirements specified in 20 CFR Part 662.

RSA has long interpreted these provisions to require that the specified
functions and activities be carried out by the DSU’s own staff (NPRM, 60
Fed. Reg. 64475, 64482 (December 15, 1995) and Final Regulations, 62
Fed. Reg. 6307, 6316 (February 11, 1997)). In addition, the VR unit must
have clear and direct supervision over VR program staff with regard to
program policy, operations, and related program matters.

The non-delegation provisions are intended to, “[strengthen] the role of
the State unit by requiring that the unit have a substantial role in all
decisions affecting the administration of the VR program whenever
management functions within the State agency are centralized” (60 Fed.
Reg. at 64482). Retaining these non-delegable functions within the DSU:

Ensure[s] that State agencies that consolidate staff to

administer multiple State and federally funded programs do
not entrust these key VR programmatic decisions to
individuals who lack experience in meeting the needs of
individuals with disabilities…[T]he benefits derived from
DSU retention of these functions – enhanced program
efficiency and effectiveness – outweigh any costs that may be
associated with the non-delegation requirements in the final
regulations (62 Fed. Reg. at 6316).

When certain functions, such as human resource development or financial
management, are placed at the DSA or departmental level, it is important
to assess the manner in which the DSU exercises a strong voice or
provides effective input into the policy, planning, operations or similar
program decisions made in these areas. While certain purely
administrative functions may be performed by personnel outside the DSU,
centralization of functions on the state agency level is impermissible if it

results in interference with the decision-making capacity of the
administrator of the DSU to direct the VR program in the state, given that
the DSU has been designated as the entity responsible for administering
the VR program under the VR State plan (34 CFR 361.13(b)(1)(i)).

---
Page 12

The following program management activities are among those that
typically are carried out by an organization that is responsible for the day-
to-day operational administration of a public VR program:

• • development of legislative proposals and regulations regarding VR
program funding and services;
• • program planning and evaluation;
• • personnel management;
• • implementation and use of management information systems; and

• • fiscal and statistical reporting.

When centralization of these or other functions occurs, questions may
arise as to whether the DSU has retained an effective voice in the making
of key policy decisions to ensure that the DSU has sufficient responsibility
for the administration of the VR program, as required by 34 CFR
361.13(c).

In making judgments about the nature and degree of DSU involvement in
these activities for the purpose of assessing compliance with the non-
delegable functions, RSA recognizes that the Rehabilitation Act provides
considerable flexibility to the state in the administration of the VR
program and that the responsibility for the administration of the state Plan
rests with the DSA in accordance with 34 CFR 361.13(a). However, the
DSU is responsible for the administration of the VR program under the

State Plan (34 361.13(b)(1)(i)), and for the operation of the VR service
delivery system (34 CFR 361.13(c)(1)(i)). In assessing the nature and
extent of the DSU's authority in carrying out its responsibility to
administer the VR program, RSA will determine whether the DSU
director indeed has the authority to administer the VR program and, if so,
the extent of that authority, i.e., if it affords the DSU adequate input with
respect to the administration of the centralized functions. RSA will review
the degree of authority and involvement of all of the DSU’s functions
taken together, and not with respect to one or more of the functions alone.

Regarding the allocation and expenditure of VR funds (an area where
questions concerning the DSU’s authority are more likely to arise), RSA
will determine whether the DSU has responsibility for the approval of
expenditures, the development and approval of contracts, budgeting for
the program, development of the cost allocation plan and the procurement
process. As the head of the DSU, the entity solely responsible for the

expenditure and allocation of VR funds pursuant to 34 CFR
361.13(c)(1)(iv), the DSU director must be privy to all financial
information about the VR program, not just informed of such information
by the DSA, and should be in direct control of the decisions affecting the
VR program. Decisions regarding staffing levels, priority setting, and the
awarding of contracts fall within the scope of the expenditure and

---
Page 13

allocation of VR funds. Therefore, decisions related to these matters
require the DSU to determine where to spend its resources for the benefit
of the program and to meet the needs of individuals with disabilities
within the state. As such, these decisions must ultimately be made by the
DSU. For example, while the DSA may centralize contracting processing,
decisions involving whether to contract for a service, the amount to be
contracted, and the service to be procured, must be retained by the DSU
since those decisions pertain to the allocation and expenditure of VR funds
and the provision of VR services, both of which are non-delegable
functions of the DSU (34 CFR 361.13(c)(1)(i) and (iv)).

In addition, the director and staff of the DSU must have sufficient
information regarding the fiscal resources available for use in the VR

program, especially in those states where the DSA has centralized the
payment and fiscal reporting processes for the entire agency. Because the
DSU is solely responsible for the allocation and expenditure of VR funds
pursuant to 34 CFR 361.13(c)(1)(iv), the DSU remains responsible for
ensuring the accuracy of financial reports and the satisfaction of all fiscal
requirements, including match and maintenance of effort. Furthermore,
the DSU must have sufficient information about the financial resources
available to the VR program in order to avoid the inadvertent and
unnecessary reallotment of funds, or, most significantly, the return of
funds to the U. S. Treasury -- actions that could occur if the DSU does not
maintain control over the expenditure and allocation of VR funds.

Finally, the VR program regulations at 34 CFR 361.23 and Section 121(c)
of WIA, along with WIA implementing regulations at 20 CFR 662.300,
require that a memorandum of understanding governing operations of the
One-Stop service delivery system in a local area be developed and

executed between the Local Workforce Investment Board and the One-
Stop service delivery system partners. Because the DSU is solely
responsible for its role as a partner in the one-stop system (34 CFR
361.13(c)(1)(v)), it must negotiate its own contracts with the other one-
stop partners. This responsibility may not be delegated to another
individual or agency, including the DSA (34 CFR 361.13(c)(2)).

SUMMARY: The federal requirements governing the organization of the VR program
provide considerable flexibility to the states in recognition of the wide
variety and complex nature of the programs and services within their
purview, while establishing a framework in which VR services are
delivered through an autonomous and distinct unit. This framework
enables the officials and personnel of the DSU to conduct those non-
delegable functions critical to the administration and operation of the VR

program. It is these persons who possess the knowledge and experience

necessary to make decisions regarding the effective and efficient use of

---
Page 14

VR program resources to address the unique needs of individuals with
disabilities as they engage in the pursuit of quality employment.

CITATIONS: Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, Section 101(a)(2)
Vocational Rehabilitation Program Regulations, 34 CFR 361.13

INQUIRIES: Carol Dobak, Chief
Vocational Rehabilitation Program Unit
• (202) 245-7325
Carol.Dobak@ed.gov

/s/
Edward Anthony, Ph.D.
Deputy Commissioner

cc: Council of State Administrators of Vocational Rehabilitation
National Council of State Agencies for the Blind
National Disability Rights Network