tac-13-02

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND
REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20202

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CIRCULAR
RSA-TAC-13-02
DATE: July 9, 2013

ADDRESSEES: STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AGENCIES
STATE REHABILITATION COUNCILS

STATEWIDE INDEPENDENT LIVING COUNCILS
CLIENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & CONTINUING
EDUCATION CENTERS
AMERICAN INDIAN VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION
SERVICE PROJECTS
CENTERS FOR INDEPENDENT LIVING

SUBJECT: Reorganization of the Designated State Agency and the Designated State
Unit for the Vocational Rehabilitation Program

PURPOSE: The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (Rehabilitation Act), provides
states with considerable flexibility in the organization of the agency or
agencies responsible for the administration of the vocational rehabilitation
• (VR) program. States may choose to designate one agency to provide VR
services to persons with all types of disabilities (known as a “combined”

agency), or two distinct agencies, one to serve individuals who are blind
and visually impaired and another to serve individuals with all other
disabilities (known as “blind” and “general” agencies, respectively)
(section 101(a)(2) of the Rehabilitation Act). In addition, states may
structure any of these agency types as a separate department or
independent commission, or locate them within existing departments.
Furthermore, states may opt to change the organizational structure of the
agency or agencies at any time following their designation.

Within the last year, the Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA) has
received several inquiries from states seeking guidance regarding issues
related to the reorganization of the agency or agencies designated as the
agency responsible for the vocational and other rehabilitation of
individuals with disabilities. RSA has noticed that, given the current
economic climate, states are considering changes in their governmental
structures to bring about greater effectiveness and efficiency in light of

decreasing revenues. Therefore, RSA provides the guidance contained in

Within the last year, the Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA) has
received several inquiries from states seeking guidance regarding issues
related to the reorganization of the agency or agencies designated as the
agency responsible for the vocational and other rehabilitation of
individuals with disabilities. RSA has noticed that, given the current
economic climate, states are considering changes in their governmental
structures to bring about greater effectiveness and efficiency in light of
decreasing revenues. Therefore, RSA provides the guidance contained in

---
Page 2

this technical assistance circular (TAC) to VR agencies regarding the
federal requirements governing the reorganization of the designated state
agency (DSA) and/or the designated state unit (DSU) responsible for the
administration and operation of the VR program. The TAC also discusses
the implications a reorganization may have on the administration of other
federal programs authorized under the Rehabilitation Act (pages 6 thru
11), as well as the processes that must be carried out on the federal and
state levels to ensure that services provided under the Rehabilitation Act
are not interrupted and funds are appropriately managed (pages 11 thru
16).

TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE: The Rehabilitation Act and its implementing regulations permit states to

select from among a variety of options when organizing the VR program
within their governmental structures. Section 101(a)(2)(A) of the
Rehabilitation Act and regulations at 34 CFR 361.13(a) require a state to
identify a DSA as the sole state agency to administer the VR State Plan, or
two DSAs, one “general” and the other “blind,” each responsible for the
administration of its respective portion of the plan (Section 101(a)(2)(A)(i)
of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR 361.13(a)(3)). For purposes of the
VR program, a DSA must be either: 1) a state agency primarily concerned
with VR, or VR and other rehabilitation, of individuals with disabilities; or
2) a state agency that includes a VR bureau, division or other
organizational unit, referred to as a DSU (Section 101(a)(2)(B) of the
Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR 361.13(a)(1)).

When considering a change in the organization of the governmental entity
or entities currently administering the VR program (e.g., the DSA(s)
and/or DSU(s)), states must ensure that the proposed structure meets the

required statutory and regulatory requirements set forth at section
101(a)(2) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR 361.13. Specifically, if
the state identifies a new DSA to administer the VR State Plan, the state
must ensure the agency is primarily concerned with VR, or VR and other
rehabilitation of individuals with disabilities. In the event that the new
DSA is not primarily concerned with VR, or VR and other rehabilitation
of individuals with disabilities, the state must assure the agency contains a
DSU that:

• • is primarily concerned with VR, or VR and other
rehabilitation, of individuals with disabilities, and is
responsible for the VR program of the DSA;
• • is administered by a full-time director;
• • employs staff on the rehabilitation work of the

organizational unit all or substantially all of whom devote
their full time to such work; and

2

this technical assistance circular (TAC) to VR agencies regarding the
federal requirements governing the reorganization of the designated state
agency (DSA) and/or the designated state unit (DSU) responsible for the
administration and operation of the VR program. The TAC also discusses
the implications a reorganization may have on the administration of other
federal programs authorized under the Rehabilitation Act (pages 6 thru
11), as well as the processes that must be carried out on the federal and
state levels to ensure that services provided under the Rehabilitation Act
are not interrupted and funds are appropriately managed (pages 11 thru
16).

---
Page 3

• • is located at an organizational level and has an
organizational status within the DSA comparable to that of
other major organizational units of the DSA.

Additionally, the VR program regulations require that the DSU carry out
the following non-delegable responsibilities:

• • the determination of eligibility, the nature and scope of
services, and the provision of those services (34 CFR
361.13(c)(1)(i));
• • the determination that individuals have achieved

employment outcomes (34 CFR 361.13(c)(1)(ii));
• • policy formulation and implementation (34 CFR
361.13(c)(1)(iii));
• • the allocation and expenditure of VR funds (34 CFR
361.13(c)(1)(iv)); and
• • the participation of the DSU in the one-stop service
delivery system in accordance with Title I of the Workforce
Investment Act (WIA) and the regulatory requirements
specified in 20 CFR Part 662 (34 CFR 361.13(c)(1)(v)).

Reorganizations, for purposes of the VR program, can take many different
forms. For example, a reorganization can involve:

• • the creation of a stand-alone DSA;
• • the movement of a DSA into another department;

• • the division of a combined DSA or DSU into separate
general and blind agencies;
• • the combination of separate general and blind DSAs or
DSUs into a single combined agency;
• • the relocation of the DSU within the same department;

• • the movement of other programs and offices into the DSU;
and
• • a combination of these options.

Together or separately, each has implications for the state’s ability to

comply with the federal organizational structure requirements and those
governing the non-delegable responsibilities of the DSU. For additional
detail regarding these requirements, refer to RSA TAC 12-03,
Organizational Structure and Non-Delegable Responsibilities of the
Designated State Unit for the Vocational Rehabilitation Program, April
16, 2012.

3

---
Page 4

A reorganization of the DSA and/or DSU can affect the structure and
composition of the State Rehabilitation Council (SRC), if the state has
established a SRC for one or more DSAs or DSUs, or the structure of the
VR agency as a consumer-controlled independent commission. Section
101(a)(21) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR 361.16(a) of the
implementing regulations require a state to assure that it has 1)
established either a single or separate SRC(s) for the VR agencies in the
state; or that 2) the DSA, or DSAs if more than one exists, is an
independent commission. For example, the state may have initially
structured a VR agency as an independent commission, thus not requiring
it to have established an SRC. If that state reorganizes the VR agency as a
component of a DSA that is no longer structured as an independent
commission, it must establish a SRC. Conversely, if a DSU is reorganized

to become an independent commission, the VR agency would not be
required to maintain its SRC so long as the new agency meets all of the
requirements of 34 CFR 361.16(a)(1).

Any changes to SRCs as a result of a reorganization must be in
compliance with composition and membership requirements contained in
section 105(b) of the Rehabilitation Act and regulations at 34 CFR
361.17(b). For additional guidance on the composition and membership
requirements of a SRC, see RSA TAC 12-01, Federal Requirements
Governing the Composition and Membership of, and Appointments to, the
State Rehabilitation Councils, October 21, 2011.

RSA is available to assist states in determining whether proposed
reorganizations are in compliance with the federal requirements discussed
above. States should submit the proposed legislation or executive order
requiring the reorganization to RSA as early as possible in the process to

ensure that any needed changes are accomplished prior to the effective
date. In general, the legislation or order should:
• • specify the effective date of the reorganization, which is typically
aligned with the beginning of the state or federal fiscal year, and
• • describe:
the structure of the VR agency, either as a DSA or DSU,
o
the location of the DSU, if one exists, within the DSA,
o
to whom the director of the VR agency will report,
o
the intervening levels, if any, of organization between the
o
DSU and the DSA; and
the composition and membership of the SRC if the new
o
DSA will not be an independent commission.
Once the state has ensured that its proposed reorganization complies with
federal requirements governing the organizational structure of the VR
program, it must engage in a variety of actions to accomplish the
reorganization by the proposed effective date. The state must consult with
4

---
Page 5

stakeholders, conduct public hearings, and amend or submit a new State
Plan. Each of these requirements will be discussed separately.

The DSA must consult with stakeholders, including tribal organizations,
the Client Assistance Program (CAP), and the SRC (Section
101(a)(16)(A) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR 361.20(d)). This
consultation process, as well as the public hearing process, is the
statutorily-mandated procedures established through which these
organizations can provide input regarding the proposed reorganization.

The DSA must conduct public hearings prior to adopting any substantive
changes that affect the provision of VR services. Since the reorganization
of a DSA or DSU is considered a substantive change in the administration

of the VR program, public hearings must be conducted pursuant to section
101(a)(16)(A) of the Rehabilitation Act and 34 CFR 361.10(d) of the
implementing regulations. The public must be provided appropriate and
sufficient notice throughout the state in accordance with State law, or in
the absence of State law, procedures developed by the DSA in
consultation with the SRC (34 CFR 361.20(b)). The DSA must hold the
hearings “throughout the state” to allow the public, including individuals
with disabilities, sufficient opportunity to provide input on the proposed
reorganization (34 CFR 361.20(a)). RSA interprets this requirement to
mean that hearings are to be conducted in multiple locations across the
state; however, in Consideration of advancements in technology, the DSA
may choose to incorporate the use of video conferencing in a single or
several locations to reach different areas of the State, as long as this option
allows the public to actively participate through interaction with the
speaker and other participating locations.

The VR agency is required to amend its currently approved State Plan if
the effective date of the reorganization will occur on a date other than the
first day of the federal fiscal year (October 1st) (34 CFR 361.10(e)). The
VR agency, at a minimum, must amend:

• • section 1 of the preprint identifying the agency authorized
to submit and administer the State Plan;
• • section 4.1 of the preprint, which identifies whether the
State agency authorized to administer the State Plan has
been designated as a DSA or DSU;
• • section 4.2 of the preprint specifying whether the VR
agency is an independent commission or has an established
SRC;

• • Attachment 4.2(c) containing the input from the SRC
regarding the reorganization and the agency’s response,
including an explanation of why any input was rejected, if
applicable;

5

---
Page 6

• • the signature and date the amended State Plan was
submitted by the authorized signatory; and
• • the name of the DSA and/or DSU wherever it appears in
the preprint and attachments, if the reorganization involves
a change in the VR agency name.

RSA must approve the amended State Plan on or before the effective date
of the reorganization so that it can release federal VR program funds to the
newly designated agency. Ideally, the amended plan should be submitted
through the RSA website no less than 30 days prior to the effective date of
the reorganization to allow sufficient time for approval; however, in some

cases the director of the new DSA or DSU is not authorized to sign and
submit the amended State Plan to RSA until the effective date of the
reorganization. Under this circumstance, the proposed designated agency
authorized to submit the State Plan should ensure the necessary
amendments are developed and submitted to RSA well in advance of the
identified effective date, thus giving RSA time to review the amendments
to ensure compliance with federal requirements. The amended plan
should then be officially submitted through the RSA website on the
effective date. RSA will have reviewed the amended State Plan in
advance, enabling it to immediately approve the plan and award the
State’s VR and supported employment grants.

States also must engage in a variety of activities to ensure that VR
program funds, along with all other federal grant funds involved in the
reorganization, are appropriately transferred from the original DSA and/or
DSU to the entities resulting from the reorganization. These specific

requirements are discussed beginning on page 10 of this TAC.
A reorganization of the DSA and/or DSU for the VR program also will
affect the state’s administration of other RSA grants and programs within
the purview of these entities. To ensure their proper administration, the
following sections of this TAC provide guidance regarding the pertinent
federal requirements related to management of these grants or programs
when the agencies responsible for the VR program undergo a structural
change.

Independent Living Programs

According to regulations at 34 CFR 364.4, the DSU for the state
independent living services (SILS) program and the centers for
independent living (CIL) program, authorized under Chapter 1 of Title VII
is the agency, or agencies in the state if the state has designated a general
and blind agency, charged with the provision of VR, or VR and other

rehabilitation services. Therefore, the state must ensure that the DSU
under the SILS and CIL programs is the state agency responsible for the
administration of the VR program. The independent living services for

6

---
Page 7

older individuals who are blind program (OIB) is affected by a DSA
reorganization. The DSA for the OIB program must be the state agency
authorized to provide rehabilitation services to individuals who are blind,
whether that is a combined or separate agency (34 CFR 367.2). In
addition, if the reorganization affects the placement, composition or
member appointments of Statewide Independent Living Council (SILC),
the state must ensure that it adheres to all SILC appointment, composition
and independence requirements at 34 CFR 364.21.

The State Plan for Independent Living (SPIL) that governs the
administration of the SILS and CIL programs must be amended whenever
necessary to reflect any material change in state law, organization, policy,
or agency operations that affects the administration of the SPIL (34 CFR
364.20(b)(1)1. Since the reorganization of the DSU or DSA changes the

organization or agency that administers the SPIL, the SPIL must be
amended. When the effective date of the reorganization falls within the
three-year period covered by the approved SPIL, the DSU and SILC must
sign and submit an amended SPIL through the RSA website addressing, at
a minimum, Sections 1 and 9 of the Part I assurances and Section 4 of the
Part II narratives. The SPIL need not be amended if the effective date of
the reorganization is October 1st of the succeeding three-year period.

If a state amends the SPIL, it must engage in the same processes as those it
must use to prepare and submit the SPIL (34 CFR 76.141). The DSU and
the SILC must conduct public meetings in accordance with their joint
procedures an in compliance with the requirements for public meetings set
forth in 34 CFR 364.20(g). So long as the DSU coordinates public
meetings with the SILC, the DSU and DSA can conduct public hearings
covering changes in the administration of both the VR and IL programs,

without the need for separate hearings, if the requirements for such
hearings are met under both 34 CFR 361.20 and 34 CFR 364.20.

The Rehabilitation Act and IL program regulations specify certain non-
delegable duties of a DSU under the SILS and CIL programs. Section
704(c) provides that the DSU shall:

• • receive, account for, and disburse funds distributed to the
state under chapter 1 of Title VII, in accordance with the
SPIL
• • provide administrative support services for a program
under part B, and a program under part C in a case in which
the program is administered by the State under section 723
of the Rehabilitation Act;

1 The OIB program is not governed by the SPIL, but by a separate application. The newly created DSA and DSU
need only submit a revised set of assurances. Public hearings are not required regarding the implications of the
reorganization for the administration of the OIB program.

7

---
Page 8

• • maintain and afford access to such records as the RSA
Commissioner finds to be necessary with respect to the
programs; and
• • submit additional information or provide assurances, as the
Commissioner may require with respect to the programs.

The regulations at 34 CFR 364.57 describe duties that the DSU can
delegate. All other duties of the DSU not specifically mentioned in that
section are non-delegable.

Randolph-Sheppard Program

As VR agencies also serve as state licensing agencies (SLA) for the
Randolph-Sheppard program, a reorganization of a DSA or DSU may
have implications for the administration of this program as well. Through
any restructuring affecting a DSA or DSU currently serving as an SLA,
states must adhere to several key requirements contained in the Randolph-
Sheppard Act and regulations at 34 CFR Part 395. The Randolph-
Sheppard program must be housed only within the DSA or DSU
responsible for the provision of VR services to individuals who are blind
(20 U.S.C. 107a(e); 34 CFR 395.2(a)), including both combined and blind
agencies. Thus, a Randolph-Sheppard program cannot be administered by
general agencies, which are for the provision of services to all individuals
with disabilities except for those who are blind and visually impaired.
States that have identified a combined DSA or DSU containing
organizational units through which services to individuals who are blind
are delivered should situate the Randolph-Sheppard program within these

components. The Randolph-Sheppard program cannot be located within
any other non-rehabilitation-related agency of government, or in a private
entity.

In addition, if a state intends, pursuant to the proposed reorganization, to
use a nominee agency to help it operate the state’s vending program, the
reorganized SLA must obtain approval of this plan from RSA (34 CFR
395.3(a) (9)). A nominee for the Randolph-Sheppard program must be a
“nonprofit agency or organization” designated by the state to fulfill these
functions (34 CFR 395.1(l)), and cannot be housed within another agency
of government. The newly organized SLA must ensure that any nominee
agency perform only those functions authorized for a nominee entity to
undertake in statute and regulations. The SLA is expected to retain for
itself ultimate control and full responsibility for the administration of the
Randolph-Sheppard program (34 CFR 395.15(a)).

The new SLA should notify RSA of its reorganization and continuing
legal authority to operate the Randolph-Sheppard program, so that its
status as the recognized SLA can be updated and reaffirmed. Similarly,

8

---
Page 9

any reorganized rehabilitation agency, operating as the SLA for Randolph-
Sheppard, should inform RSA of any contemplated changes to its
governing program policies or rules (34 CFR 395.3(a)(11)(iii)). It is
important in this context to recognize that the Randolph-Sheppard Act and
regulations require that the SLA facilitate “active participation” among the
state’s Elected Committee of Blind Vendors in reviewing and approving
any modifications to major administrative procedures and governing
policies of the program before RSA will issue new approvals of such
policies (20 U.S.C 107b-1(3)(A); 34 CFR 395.14(b)(1)). Finally, the new
SLA should review any corresponding and similar state legislation that
may provide a Randolph-Sheppard-like priority on state or local properties
to ensure that any new organizational names, along with other critical
changes, are reflected in state law.

In-Service Training Grant

Pursuant to Title III of the Rehabilitation Act, RSA awards an in-service
grant to a DSA or DSU for the VR program in accordance with its
application. Prior to the effective date of the reorganization, the grantee
must notify RSA of the upcoming reorganization in writing. The newly
organized DSA or DSU must submit an assurance that it will adhere to the
requirements and commitments outlined in the original grant application,
including but not limited to the following: 1) to serve the population
specified in the original grant application, using the design approved by
RSA; and (2) to use the same key personnel to conduct the work of the
grants or substitute key personnel who have been approved by RSA as
meeting the qualifications of the original key personnel. In addition, the
new entity must submit an Application for Federal Assistance (Form SF-
424), a Certification Regarding Lobbying, and Budget Information for the

grant (Form ED-524).

Statewide Assistive Technology Grant

The extent to which the reorganization affects the administration of the
statewide assistive technology (AT) program depends on whether the DSU
for the VR program is the lead agency for the AT program and if it uses an
implementing entity. In accordance with Section 4(c)(1)(A) of the
Assistive Technology Act of 1998, as amended (AT Act), the governor of
the state designates a public agency as a lead agency to administer the
states AT program. In approximately 50 percent of the states, the DSA or
DSU for the VR program is that lead agency. In addition to the lead
agency, the governor may designate an agency or office to be an
implementing entity for the program (Section 4(c)(1)(B), which carries out
responsibilities under the AT Act through a subcontract or another
administrative agreement with the lead agency.

9

---
Page 10

The governor may redesignate the lead agency, or the implementing
entity, if the Governor demonstrates to RSA “good cause” as to why the
entity currently designated as the lead agency or implementing entity
should no longer administer the AT program (Section 4(c)(1)(C)).
Though not defined in the AT Act, RSA interprets “good cause” to include
instances where the reorganization of state government affect the agency
charged with the administration of the program. The Governor must also
show that the agency or entity that has been proposed to serve as the new
lead agency or implementing entity is able to meet the requirements of the
AT Act. Once RSA approves the redesignation, the new entity must
submit a new AT State Plan through the RSA website, containing any
changes to the program goals and activities. RSA must approve the new
plan before AT program funds can be distributed to the new lead agency

or implementing entity.

Client Assistance Program

A reorganization of the DSA and DSU for the VR program may have an
impact on the state’s CAP, if it is also located within the DSA (known as
an “internal” CAP). Section 112(c)(1)(B)(ii)(I) of the Rehabilitation Act
states if a DSA, “undergoes any change in the organizational structure of
the agency that results in the creation of 1 or more new State agencies or
departments or results in the merger of the designated State agency with 1
or more other State agencies or departments”, the CAP must be
redesignated to a public or private agency independent of any agency that
provides treatment, services, or rehabilitation to individuals under the
Rehabilitation Act. Therefore, when any DSA with an internal CAP
undergoes a reorganization of the VR program to a new or different DSA,
the governor must redesignate the CAP. However, a state is not required

to redesignate an internal CAP in connection with the reorganization of a
DSA that does not result in the creation of one or more new state agencies
or departments, or the merger of the DSA with one or more departments.
For example, a state with an internal CAP would not be required to
redesignate its CAP if the reorganization occurs solely within the
organizational structure of the DSA, such as merging multiple divisions,
bureaus or units (e.g., general and blind DSUs) into one entity while
remaining under the same DSA.

It is important to note that Section 112(b) of the Rehabilitation Act
requires states to have an effective and operational CAP prior to receiving
funding for any program authorized under the Rehabilitation Act,
including the VR and IL programs. Therefore, states should address the
potential redesignation of an internal CAP as early as possible in the
reorganization process to ensure that the CAP is operational on the
effective date of the DSA reorganization. See CAP program regulations at

10

---
Page 11

34 CFR 370.10 through 370.17 for the steps and timelines involved in the
redesignation of the CAP.

Transfer of Funds and Reporting

The original DSA and/or DSU (transferor), along with the entities to
which their responsibilities are transferred (transferee), must engage in a
variety of activities (detailed below) to ensure the timely transfer of
existing award balances and/or new grant award funds with respect to each
program discussed above. Also, see “Reorganization of the Designated
State Agency and Designated State Unit for the Vocational Rehabilitation
Program: Responsibilities of the Transferor and Transferee,” attached
hereto, for a checklist of the activities that must be carried out by the

parties involved in the reorganization. These processes may vary
depending on when the reorganization occurs during the grant award
period.

• • Grant Award numbers: When a grant award is transferred from
one grantee to another, regardless of the time of the transfer, the
Department of Education requires that the transferee obtain a new
PR/Award number. RSA will establish the new PR/Award number
and assign it to the transferee. The PR/Award number associated
with the transferor will no longer be used once all grant funds have
been drawn down and the award has been closed. When a transfer
occurs at the beginning of a federal fiscal year, it is possible that a
transferee may receive two new PR/Award numbers, one for the
new federal fiscal year (FFY), and one for the prior FFY if funds
remaining in the grant year are eligible for carryover into the

subsequent year in accordance with Section 19 of the
Rehabilitation Act.

• • Grant Transfer Agreement: The transferor and transferee agencies
must enter into a single grant transfer agreement covering each
federal award, or separate agreements for each. This document
provides necessary dates and figures regarding the amount of funds
the transferor needs to meet its obligations under the awards, and
the amount of funds available for the transferee to begin
administering its programs. The grant transfer agreement must
reference the state statute, legislation, or executive order that
authorizes the grant transfer. The grant transfer agreement should
be reviewed and approved by RSA prior to execution.

• • Transfer of funds: When transfers involve the redistribution of

grant award funds between agencies, it is important to determine
the amount of funds necessary for the transferor to honor the
obligations made while it was the grant holder to ensure the grant

11

---
Page 12

transfer process is efficient and effective. The transferor must
provide the transferee with an estimate of the amount of funds that
will remain in its grant award so that it can liquidate allowable
unliquidated obligations incurred prior to the effective date of the
transfer. The transferor also must identify the amount of any funds
available for immediate transfer to the transferee at the time the
grant transfer agreement is executed. This may occur when the
transferor anticipates a balance of funds will remain that is more
than the amount the transferor estimates will be required to fulfill
its obligations. Both the estimate of funds the transferor needs to
liquidate unliquidated obligations, and the amount available for
immediate transfer, will be provided on the grant transfer
agreement.

Transfers that involve carryover funds from a prior FFY require
RSA to obtain approval through a Request for Use of Prior Year
funds before the transfer may be made. This may occur for
transfers at the beginning of a FFY when remaining grant funds
from the prior fiscal year are eligible for carryover in accordance
with Section 19 of the Rehabilitation Act, or from a late-FFY
transfer resulting in the transferor fulfilling its obligations with
funds remaining after the beginning of the subsequent FFY. See
“Non-Federal Share” below regarding the transfer of allowable
carryover funds. To process the Request for Use of Prior Year’s
funds, the amount being transferred to the transferee will be
deobligated from the transferor’s account and then, when the form
is approved, be obligated to the transferee.

Grant transfers that occur at the beginning of a FFY permit the

transferee to more quickly obtain and receive funds. Since the
transferee will have a new PR/Award number for the new FFY,
once funds have been appropriated from Congress, RSA will
obligate the grantee’s allotment once all requirements have been
met (e.g., an approved VR State Plan or SPIL covering that FFY,
establishment of payee account information in the G5 grants
management system). If the grant transfer occurs in the middle of
a FFY, there is a more urgent need to transfer funds to the
transferee to begin operations immediately, since no new funds
will be available until the subsequent FFY.

• • Final transfers: After the transferor has made its last draw,
liquidated its obligations, and is preparing the final SF-425 report,
the transferor must inform RSA of any balance of grant funds. If
so, the transferee may receive an additional transfer of prior year

funds as long as those funds meet the requirements of the program.
As mentioned above, this transfer may require RSA to submit a

12

---
Page 13

Request for Use of Prior Year’s Funds to obtain approval to
reallocate funds from a previous FFY.

• • Logistics: The transferee is required to complete several steps
before it can access funds through the G5 grants management
system. The transferee can register in the system by accessing the
G5 website: https://www.g5.gov. On the left hand side of that
website is a link labeled “Non ED employee Sign Up,” and the
user may register by following the instructions provided.

To use the G5 system, the transferee is required to provide both a payee
and grantee data universal numbering system (DUNS) number. When

establishing the new award in G5, after the G5 staff has entered the payee
DUNS number and banking information in the system, RSA staff are able
to enter the grantee DUNS number into the system. If the payee and
grantee DUNS numbers are different, the grantee must also work with G5
staff to enter the grantee DUNS number in the G5 system before RSA can
assign that number to a grant award. To initiate changes in G5, the
transferee must notify the Department of Education in writing on the
grantee's official letterhead of the request. The letter must contain the
following information:

• • grantee name;
• • grantee DUNS number;
• • current payee DUNS number to be deactivated, if this action is being

requested;
• • new payee DUNS number to be activated, and grantee DUNS number
if different from payee;
• • PR/Award Number;
• • grantee’s Contact phone number and email address; and
• • signature of certifying representative (senior program officer) for the
grantee organization;

The request should be mailed to:

U.S. Department of Education
Office of the Chief Information Officer

Mail Stop – 4138
Potomac Center Plaza
Attn: G5 Functional Application Team
550 12Th Street, SW
Washington, DC 20202

The Grantee may expedite the change process by faxing this letter to the
Attention of the G5 Functional Application Team at 202-245-8219.

13

---
Page 14

Direct any questions regarding the assignment/reassignment of payee
DUNS numbers to the G5/GAPS Payee Hotline at 888-336-8930. Note
that for a new Payee DUNS number, the G5/GAPS External User Access
Form and the banking information must be submitted to the Department of
Education, in addition to the letter.

Financial Reporting: The transferor and transferee are responsible
o
for financial reporting related to the obligations and expenditures
associated with allowable activities for the period of availability of
each entity’s funds. Obligations occurring prior to the date of
transfer are the responsibility of the transferor, while those
occurring after the date of transfer will be the responsibility of the
transferee. The transferor must submit a final SF-425 report for
each grant program involved in the reorganization 90 days from
the date that signifies the end of grant support (34 CFR
80.41(b)(4)). It is critical that the two entities coordinate during
this phase of the reorganization process to determine if all
unliquidated obligations have been liquidated, or if the transferee
must draw and expend funds for the transferor's unliquidated
obligations that have not cleared.

Non-federal Share: In cases when the grant transfer occurs in a
o
program with a match and/or maintenance of effort (MOE)
requirement, or in circumstances where the state appropriates
funds to support the program, the transferor and transferee must
determine which entity expends and reports the funds on the SF-
For purposes of the VR program, the match and MOE are
state-level requirements; therefore, sufficient non-federal funds
must be expended and reported on the transferor and/or transferee
SF-425 reports for allowable program activities by September 30th
of the year in which the grant is awarded. The SILS and OIB
programs have a state match, but no MOE requirement. Only
those federal funds that have been matched by the state in that
fiscal year may be transferred from the transferor to transferee as
carryover for use in the subsequent fiscal year. It is the
responsibility of the transferor and transferee to determine the
responsible party for expending and reporting non-federal funds in
accordance with the state’s process for transferring any remaining
and unexpended non-federal funds associated with the program.

Performance Reports: The transferor and transferee agencies
o
together are responsible for ensuring the state meets its annual
performance reporting obligations for each of the federal programs
covered by the reorganization. Generally, the transferor is
responsible for providing the data required for the completion of
all annual performance reports associated with the programs

14

---
Page 15

affected by the reorganization to the transferee. The transferee is
then responsible for submitting the reports for the entire fiscal year
during which the reorganization occurred in accordance with
applicable deadlines. However, if the performance report is
submitted on a semi-annual or quarterly basis, such as the RSA-
113 Cumulative Caseload Report, the transferor should submit the
report(s) due up until the date of the reorganization and the
transferee is responsible for submitting these reports thereafter.

Access to RSA Website: Prior to any reorganization, the state
o
entities involved must ensure the appropriate personnel maintain,
obtain or, in some cases, terminate their required access to program
and fiscal reports contained on the RSA website. As the effective
date for the reorganization approaches, RSA will notify staff
responsible for maintaining its website of all programs involved in
the reorganization, the date it will become effective and the name
of the new agency or agencies. State agencies involved in the
reorganization should clarify with RSA which of their staff, if any,
will no longer require access to a specific report or require access
to additional reports. Often, many of the same personnel will be
working with the new State entity, requiring the same level of
access to the same reports. Since the agency name and grant
number associated with each program will change upon the
effective date of the reorganization, state officials and personnel
should ensure they maintain the same level of access available
prior to the reorganization. For example, an individual with access
to enter information into the State Plan should have the same level
of access after the effective date, and should check access to this
form is available after the effective date of the reorganization.

When state personnel from the original agency no longer require access to
a report or reports, RSA should be notified which staff will no longer
require access and the date their access should be terminated. Since an
agency will typically have 90 days to submit all required reports, access to
most reports would not be terminated on the date the reorganization
becomes effective.

Following the reorganization, some individuals may require access to
additional reports. If a user currently has a user identification (ID), the
individual can request access to additional reports directly through the
website. To do so, the user would log in and select “Click here to try to
add access” located at the top right side of the page.

In addition to the permissions required to access each report, the new
designated agency should provide RSA the names and contact information

15

---
Page 16

for all staff responsible for programs or reports, so it can maintain its
contact database and various listservs.

SUMMARY: A state may choose to reorganize the structure of the agency or agencies
responsible for the administration of the VR program for various reasons,
such as the need to achieve cost savings and program efficiencies,
selecting from among a variety of organizational options permitted under
the Rehabilitation Act. The option the state determines appropriate to
accomplish the objectives of the reorganization must be in compliance
with the federal requirements described in this TAC pertaining to the VR
program, as well as all other grant programs affected by the
reorganization, including the IL, in-service training, Randolph- Sheppard,
CAP, and AT programs. In addition, states must engage in numerous

activities prior to and subsequent to the effective date of the
reorganization, including the conduct of public hearings, the submission of
amended State Plans or grant applications, the execution of grant transfer
agreements, and the reporting of financial and program data, all of which
are necessary to ensure a timely, well-managed reorganization and the
continuing delivery of services to individuals with disabilities.

CITATIONS: Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, at Sections 101(a)(2), (16) and
(21); Section 105, and Section 704.

Randolph-Sheppard Act at 20 U.S.C. Sections 107a and 107b

Assistive Technology Act of 1998, as amended, at Section 4(c)

VR program regulations at 34 CFR 361.10, 361.16, 361.17 and 361.20

IL program regulations at 34 CFR 364.4, 364.20, 364.21, and 364.57.OIB
program regulations at 34 CFR 367.2

EDGAR regulations at 34 CFR 76.141

Randolph-Sheppard program regulations at 34 CFR 395.1, 395.2, 395.3,
395.14 and 395.15

INQUIRIES: Carol Dobak, Chief
Vocational Rehabilitation Program Unit
• (202) 245-7325
carol.dobak@ed.gov

16

---
Page 17

/s/
Edward Anthony, Ph.D.
Deputy Commissioner
Attachment

cc: Council of State Administrators of Vocational Rehabilitation
National Council of State Agencies for the Blind
Consortia of Administrators of Native American Rehabilitation
National Disability Rights Network

17

---
Page 18

REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

Reorganization of the Designated State Agency
And Designated State Unit for the
Vocational Rehabilitation Program

Responsibilities of the Transferor and Transferee for the Transfer of Grant Awards

Transferor Responsibilities:

A. In collaboration with Transferee, provide RSA the authorizing legislation
for the transfer.
• B. Ensure all required federal reports, (e.g., federal financial reports, RSA-2,
RSA-911, etc.) have been submitted. If transfer is not at the end of the
FFY, provide transferee agency with required reporting data for period of
award for which transferor was responsible.

• C. For open awards with a remaining federal balance that will be transferred
to the transferee, determine the amount of funds that will be made
available to the transferee on the start date of the transfer. As a reminder,
federal funds may need to remain available to the transferor during the 90-
day liquidation period after the award transfer date.

• D. Notify the RSA Fiscal Unit Specialist in writing regarding the amount of
funds, if any, by grant award that should be deobligated and transferred to
the new agency at the time the transferee receives the awards.
• E. Liquidate remaining obligations and submit a final federal financial report
within 90 calendar days after the end of the period for which the transferor
was responsible.

• F. Once liquidation is complete and all federal reports, including the final
federal financial report, have been submitted, notify the RSA Fiscal Unit
Specialist in writing that all reports are complete and include the amount
of any remaining funds, by grant award, which should be deobligated and
transferred to the new grantee.

• G. Ensure that all service records are transferred to Transferee to ensure
programmatic records are available and maintained by Transferee
according to federal requirements.
H. Ensure any outstanding corrective action plans or performance
improvement plans, including supporting documentation, are transferred

to Transferee.
• I. Maintain a primary person as a point of contact with RSA regarding the
previous awards and any reporting or closeout issues that may arise.

18

---
Page 19

Transferee Responsibilities:
• A. Submit information necessary to establish account in the Department of
Education G5 Grants Management System.

• B. Provide RSA Fiscal Unit Specialist with information required to establish
new grant award number in G5.
• C. Submit user access request forms for appropriate individuals to receive

access to online reports located on the RSA website.
• D. Collaborate with the transferor to determine the amount of funds that will
be transferred:

• i. For carryover funds transferred from awards with matching
requirements, ensure the transferor has met the nonfederal share
requirement for any remaining federal funds.
ii. For awards with matching requirements, if the transfer is not at the end
of the FFY, determine the amount of nonfederal share available to the
state as a whole for the program during the FFY. This will provide the
transferee with an estimate of the amount of federal funds the program

was able to match, and therefore expend, for the FFY.
• E. If the transfer is not at the end of the FFY, collaborate with the transferor
to ensure that data required to submit federal reports are made available.
Transferor is responsible for providing the transferee agency with required
reporting data for period of award for which transferor was responsible.

RSA Responsibilities:

• A. Provide a copy of the grant transfer agreement template to Transferor.
• B. Work with Transferor and Transferee to ensure the grant transfer
agreement is complete and all required information is provided.

C. Review and approve State Plans or applications as appropriate.
• D. Work with Transferee to provide new PR/Award Number(s) and ensure
Grantee DUNS number is accurate on the grant award notification.

• E. Deobligate and reallot funds in accordance with the approved grant
transfer agreement.

19