TAC-17-01

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON, DC 20202-2800

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CIRCULAR
RSA-TAC-17-01
DATE: June 11, 2024

ADDRESSEES: STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AGENCIES
STATE REHABILITATION COUNCILS
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTERS

SUBJECT: Performance Accountability Guidance for Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (WIOA) Core Programs

PURPOSE:

This guidance updates Technical Assistance Circular (TAC) 17-01 published September 15,
2022, and developed jointly by the U.S. Departments of Labor (DOL) and Education (ED) (the
Departments). ED’s Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education (OCTAE) will update
Program Memorandum (PM) 17-2 and DOL’s Employment and Training Administration (ETA)
will update Training and Employment Guidance Letter (TEGL) 10-16 to be consistent with the
changes reflected herein.

With this issuance, the Departments update the guidance to reflect changes made in the
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Effectiveness in Serving Employers Performance
Indicator final rule (89 FR 13814 (Feb. 23, 2024)) (final rule). This final rule took effect March
25, 2024, and defined the Effectiveness in Serving Employers primary indicator of performance,
as required by WIOA section 116(b)(2), as Retention with the Same Employer. The final rule
requires States to report the indicator as a shared indicator across the six core programs. This
guidance also incorporates other changes to improve clarity.

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE:

This TAC rescinds and replaces Technical Assistance Circular (TAC) 17-01 published
September 15, 2022. These changes update the portions of the guidance that relate to
Effectiveness in Serving Employers to align with the final rule; it also clarifies what can be
counted as an Educational Functional Level gain type for the Measurable Skills Gain indicator.
The remainder of this guidance remains unchanged.

WIOA section 116 establishes performance accountability indicators and performance reporting
requirements to assess the effectiveness of States and local areas in achieving positive outcomes
for individuals served by the workforce development system’s six core programs. These six core
programs are the Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth programs, authorized under WIOA title I
and administered by DOL; the Adult Education and Family Literacy Act (AEFLA) program,
authorized under WIOA title II and administered by ED; the Employment Service program
authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act, as amended by WIOA title III and administered by
DOL; and the Vocational Rehabilitation (VR) program authorized under title I of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended by WIOA title IV and administered
by ED. WIOA provides a historic opportunity to align performance-related definitions,
streamline performance indicators, integrate reporting, and ensure comparable data collection

---
Page 2

and reporting across all six of these core programs, while also implementing program-specific
requirements related to data collection and reporting.

Through this guidance, the Departments explain the performance accountability requirements in
section 116 of WIOA, 20 CFR part 677 of the Joint WIOA Final Rule (also reproduced in 34
CFR parts 361 (VR) and 463 (AEFLA)), and the performance reporting requirements in the
WIOA Joint Performance Accountability Information and Reporting System (WIOA
Performance information collection request (ICR)), approved by the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) as Control No. 1205-0526. Specifically, this guidance addresses the:

• • Methodology and guidance for calculating the six primary indicators of performance for
the core programs;
• • Definitions of: (1) reportable individual, (2) participant, (3) exit, and (4) period of
participation; and
• • Guidance related to: (1) career services vs. training services, and (2) incumbent worker
training.

Where applicable, this document refers to data elements in the WIOA Joint Participant
Individual Record Layout (Joint PIRL).1 Additional references are also made to the DOL-only
PIRL, as applicable for the DOL-administered programs.

The specific sections of this guidance can be found on the following pages:

Section Page
Primary Indicators of Performance 3
A. Employment Rate – 2nd Quarter After Exit 5
A-1. Title I Youth Education and Employment Rate – 2nd Quarter After Exit
6
Quarter
B. Employment Rate – 4th Quarter After Exit 6
B-1. Title I Youth Education and Employment Rate – 4th Quarter After Exit
7
Quarter
C. Median Earnings – 2nd Quarter After Exit 7
D. Credential Attainment 8
E. Measurable Skill Gains 13
F. Effectiveness in Serving Employers 18
Categories of Enrollment: Reportable Individual, Participant & Date of Exit
19
from the program
Self-Service and Information-Only Activities 25
Period of Participation 25
Career Service and Training Service Guidance 26
Incumbent Worker Training Under Title I 29

1 ETA Form-9170, the WIOA Participant Individual Record Layout (Joint PIRL), has been approved with OMB
Control Number 1205-0526 (Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Common Performance Reporting,
expiration date April 30, 2027), available at https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/performance/reporting. The PIRL
provides a standardized set of data elements, definitions, and reporting instructions used to describe the
characteristics, activities, and outcomes of WIOA participants. The DOL-only PIRL (ETA-9172) can also be found
at this link.
2

Section Page
Primary Indicators of Performance 3
A. Employment Rate – 2nd Quarter After Exit 5
| A-1. Title I Youth Education and Employment Rate – 2nd Quarter After Exit
Quarter | | | 6 | | |
B. Employment Rate – 4th Quarter After Exit 6
| B-1. Title I Youth Education and Employment Rate – 4th Quarter After Exit
Quarter | | | 7 | | |
C. Median Earnings – 2nd Quarter After Exit 7
D. Credential Attainment 8
E. Measurable Skill Gains 13
F. Effectiveness in Serving Employers 18
| Categories of Enrollment: Reportable Individual, Participant & Date of Exit
from the program | | | 19 | | |
Self-Service and Information-Only Activities 25
Period of Participation 25
Career Service and Training Service Guidance 26
Incumbent Worker Training Under Title I 29

---
Page 3

Operating Guidance.

• a. Definitions of Terms Related to the Performance Accountability System.
This guidance uses the following terms. See Attachment I for complete definitions.

• • Common Exit
• • Competitive Integrated Employment

• • Customized Training
• • Employment
• • Exit
• • Incumbent worker
• • Integrated Education and Training Program (IET)
• • Participant
• • Participant Individual Record Layout
• • Period of participation

• • Reportable individual
• • Secondary school diploma
• • Unsubsidized employment

• b. Primary Indicators of Performance.

Under section 116(b)(2)(A) of WIOA, there are six primary indicators of performance:

• A. Employment Rate – 2nd Quarter After Exit: The percentage of participants who are
in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program
(for title I Youth, the indicator is the percentage of participants in education or

training activities, or in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after
exit);

• B. Employment Rate – 4th Quarter After Exit: The percentage of participants who are in
unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit from the program (for
title I Youth, the indicator is the percentage of participants in education or training
activities, or in unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit);

• C. Median Earnings – 2nd Quarter After Exit: The median earnings of participants who
are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the
program;

• D. Credential Attainment: The percentage of those participants enrolled in an education
or training program (excluding those in on-the-job training (OJT) and customized
training) who attain a recognized postsecondary credential or a secondary school
diploma, or its recognized equivalent, during participation in or within one year after
exit from the program. A participant who has attained a secondary school diploma or

its recognized equivalent is included in the percentage of participants who have
attained a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent only if the
participant also is employed or is enrolled in an education or training program leading
to a recognized postsecondary credential within one year after exit from the program;

3

---
Page 4

• E. Measurable Skill Gains: The percentage of program participants who, during a
program year, are in an education or training program that leads to a recognized
postsecondary credential or employment and who are achieving measurable skill
gains, defined as documented academic, technical, occupational, or other forms of
progress, toward such a credential or employment. Depending on the type of
education or training program, documented progress is defined as one of the
following:

• • Documented achievement of at least one educational functioning level of a

participant who is receiving instruction below the postsecondary education level;

• • Documented attainment of a secondary school diploma or its recognized
equivalent;

• • Secondary or postsecondary transcript or report card for a sufficient number of
credit hours that shows a participant is meeting the State unit’s academic
standards;2

• • Satisfactory or better progress report, toward established milestones, such as
completion of OJT or completion of one year of an apprenticeship program or
similar milestones, from an employer or training provider who is providing

training; or

• • Successful passage of an exam that is required for a particular occupation or
progress in attaining technical or occupational skills as evidenced by trade-
related benchmarks such as knowledge-based exams.

• F. Effectiveness in Serving Employers: The percentage of participants in unsubsidized
employment during the second quarter after exit from the program who were
employed by the same employer in the second and fourth quarters after exit. For the
six core programs, this indicator is a statewide indicator reported by one core program
on behalf of all six core programs in the State, as described in the guidance below.

The methodologies for calculating most of the primary indicators of performance are
written as equations (see ETA-9169 for specifications), clearly identifying which
cohorts are in the numerator and which cohorts are in the denominator. In cases

where there are conditions that apply to both the numerator and denominator, the
condition is represented in italics at the beginning of the discussion about the
indicator.

These primary indicators of performance apply to all six core programs, except that
the indicators for credential attainment and measurable skill gains do not apply to the
title III Employment Service program.

For the four employment-related performance indicators (employment rates in the second and
fourth quarters after exit, median earnings in the second quarter after exit, and effectiveness in

2 Within each State there is an administrative unit that provides authorization to postsecondary institutions within the
State. States differ in the requirements to which they hold postsecondary institutions responsible for satisfactory
progress. Progress for WIOA purposes must comply with any applicable State standards. Likewise, every State has a
State Educational Agency that establishes education standards for secondary education within the State, which
would apply for purposes of determining if a participant is meeting the State’s academic standards.
4

---
Page 5

serving employers), status in unsubsidized employment and quarterly earnings may be
determined by direct Unemployment Insurance (UI) wage match, Federal employment records,
military employment records, or supplemental wage information. Participants who are in the
military or in a Registered Apprenticeship program are also considered as employed in
unsubsidized employment, and their quarterly earnings are calculated, for the purpose of these
indicators. Supplemental wage information may be collected in those circumstances where
quarterly wage records are not available or may not apply (e.g., for participants who are self-
employed or for participants who decline to provide a social security number (SSN)). States must
submit supplemental wage information to the Departments by using the data reporting

instruments (i.e., PIRL and Statewide and Local Performance Report Template and
Specifications). The Departments’ protocols on the use and reporting of supplemental wage
information are described in Guidance on the use of Supplemental Wage Information to
implement the Performance Accountability Requirements under the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act.3

In addition, as set forth in more detail in Attachment II, Table A and Attachment II, Table B,
under very limited circumstances, some participants who exit programs are excluded from the
performance calculations for the six indicators. These categories of exclusions apply to
participants in all six core programs who exit for any of the reasons described in Attachment II,
Tables A and B. Additionally, participants receiving services under WIOA section 225 are
excluded from exit-based measures described in Attachment II, Table C.

Furthermore, participants who have exited a program, but for whom exit-based information (e.g.,
employment-related information) is not yet available, are not included in performance
calculations until such data subsequently become available. For the employment-related

indicators (i.e., employment rates in the second and fourth quarters after exit, median earnings in
the second quarter after exit, and effectiveness in serving employers), if employment status is
recorded as “Information not yet available” or if total earnings are recorded as all 9s (data were
not yet available), the participant record will be excluded from the performance calculations. The
Departments anticipate, however, that data for the employment indicators will generally be
available, as there is a two-quarter lag built into the reporting times for the employment- and
wage-based indicators to allow time for reporting participant exit and conducting direct UI wage
record match.

The methodology for calculating the primary indicators of performance for the core programs
and the operational parameters determining the population assessed for each primary indicator
are as follows:

A. Employment Rate – 2nd Quarter After Exit

Employment Rate – 2nd Quarter After Exit is the percentage of program participants who are in

unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program.

Methodology:
Calculation includes all program participants, except those participating in the title I Youth
program (which will be discussed separately below):

3 See Guidance on the use of Supplemental Wage Information to implement the Performance Accountability
Requirements under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, joint guidance issued on June 1, 2017, via the
OCTAE PM 17-6, ETA TEGL 26-16, and RSA TAC 17-04.
5

---
Page 6

The number of participants who exited during the reporting period who are found to be
employed, either through direct UI wage record match, Federal or military employment records,
or supplemental wage information, in the second quarter after the exit quarter DIVIDED by the
number of participants who exited during the reporting period.

Operational Parameters:
When calculating levels of performance for this indicator, States must include all participants
exiting the title I Adult, title I Dislocated Worker, title II AEFLA, title III Employment Service,
and title IV VR programs; however, States must not include (in either the numerator or

denominator) those participants who exit during the reporting period for any of the reasons listed
in Attachment II, Table A or Attachment II, Table C (PIRL 923) regarding exclusions.

A-1. Title I Youth Education and Employment Rate – 2nd Quarter After Exit

Title I Youth Education and Employment Rate – 2nd Quarter After Exit is the percentage of title
I Youth program participants who are in education or training activities, or in unsubsidized
employment, during the second quarter after exit from the program.

Methodology:
Calculation includes all title I Youth program participants:

The number of title I Youth program participants who exited during the reporting period who
are found to be employed, either through direct UI wage record match, Federal or military
employment records, or supplemental wage information, OR found to be enrolled in secondary
education, postsecondary education, or occupational skills training (including advanced training)

in the second quarter after the exit quarter DIVIDED by the number of title I Youth program
participants who exited the program during the reporting period.

Operational Parameters:
Calculations for determining levels of performance for this indicator include all participants who
exit the title I Youth program except those that exit for any of the reasons listed in Attachment
II, Table B or Attachment II, Table C (PIRL 923). Title I Youth who are in the AmeriCorps
program or Job Corps program in the second quarter after exit are counted as a success in the
training portion of the indicator.

B. Employment Rate – 4th Quarter After Exit

Employment Rate – Fourth Quarter After Exit is the percentage of program participants who are
in unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit from the program.

Methodology:

Calculation includes all program participants, except those participating in the title I Youth
program (which will be discussed separately below):

The number of participants who exited during the reporting period who are found to be
employed, either through direct UI wage record match, Federal or military employment records,
or supplemental wage information, in the fourth quarter after the exit quarter DIVIDED by the
number of participants who exited during the reporting period.

Operational Parameters:
Calculation of levels of performance for this indicator includes all participants who exit from the
6

---
Page 7

title I Adult, title I Dislocated Worker, title II AEFLA, title III Employment Service, and title IV
VR programs, except States must not include (in either the numerator or denominator) those who
exit for any of the reasons listed in Attachment II, Table A.

B-1. Title I Youth Education and Employment Rate – 4th Quarter After Exit

Title I Youth Education and Employment Rate – Fourth Quarter After Exit is the percentage of
program participants who are in education or training activities, or in unsubsidized employment,
during the fourth quarter after exit from the program.

Methodology:
Calculation includes all title I Youth program participants who exit from the program:

The number of title I Youth program participants who exited the program during the reporting
period who are found to be employed, either through direct UI wage record match, Federal or
military employment records, or supplemental wage information, OR found to be enrolled in
secondary education, postsecondary education, or occupational skills training (including
advanced training) in the fourth quarter after the exit quarter DIVIDED by the number of title I
Youth program participants who exited the program during the reporting period.

Operational Parameters:
Calculation of levels of performance for this indicator includes all participants who exit from the
title I Youth program, except those who exit for any of the reasons listed in Attachment II,
Table B. Title I Youth who are in the AmeriCorps program or Job Corps program in the fourth
quarter after exit are counted as a success in the training portion of the indicator.

C. Median Earnings – 2nd Quarter After Exit

Median Earnings – 2nd Quarter After Exit is the median earnings of program participants who
are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program, as
established through direct UI wage record match, Federal or military employment records, or
supplemental wage information.

Methodology:
To calculate the median earnings for all participants employed in the second quarter after exit
from any of the core programs, including the title I Youth program:

Total quarterly earnings, for all participants employed in the second quarter after exit, are
collected by either direct wage record match or supplemental wage information. The collected
quarterly wage information values are listed in order, from the lowest to the highest value. The
value in the middle of this list is the median earnings value, where there is the same quantity of

numbers above the median number as there is below the median number. As a note, States must
report actual wages paid, not wages promised for subsequent quarters.

In accordance with the WIOA regulations and joint guidance on supplemental wage
information,4 if quarterly wage records are not available for a participant, States are permitted to
report earnings using supplemental wage information. When using supplemental wage
information, States must use the source documents identified on pages 9 through 13 in

4 See Guidance on the use of Supplemental Wage Information to implement the Performance Accountability
Requirements under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, joint guidance issued on June 1, 2017 via the
OCTAE PM 17-6, ETA TEGL 26-16, and RSA TAC 17-04.
7

---
Page 8

Attachment I of the joint guidance for validating jointly required performance data.5 The Wage
Conversion Chart (Attachment III) is used to convert supplemental wage or earnings
information values into a quarterly earnings value. These conversions are the result of
calculations using actual wage data that have been verified through source documentation. When
using the Wage Conversion Chart, it is important to distinguish between wage and earnings as
they are used in this guidance. Wages are often expressed as a ratio of earnings over a specific
period of time (e.g., dollars per hour) whereas earnings is the total earnings for the whole period.
The Wage Conversion Chart should be used only when the wage rate—and not the information
on quarterly earnings—is available.

Operational Parameters:
The following participants and any associated earnings figures are excluded from the calculation
for median earnings:

• • Participants who have exited and are not employed in the second quarter after exit (PIRL
1602 – Employed in 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter – with code value 0)
• • Participants who have exited a program and for whom earnings information is not yet
available:
PIRL 1602 – Employed in 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter – with code 09
o
(Information not yet available); or
PIRL 1603 – Type of Employment Match 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter – with
o
code value 5 (Information not yet available); or
PIRL 1704 – Wages 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter – with all 9s code value
o
(Information not yet available) or blank.
There is a two-quarter lag built into the reporting times for the wage- and employment-based
indicators to allow time for reporting participant exit and conducting direct wage record match.
After two quarters, if a direct wage record match or supplemental wage information is still not
available, wages will be converted to $0 permanently. Wages reported as $0 will indicate that the
participant was not employed in the second quarter after exit, thereby counting as a negative
outcome in the Employment Rate 2nd Quarter After Exit indicator and excluding that participant
from the Median Earnings 2nd Quarter After Exit indicator. Examples of this include:
• • Participants who have exited from a program and who have $0 income.
• • Participants who have exited a program and are in subsidized employment.
• • Participants who have exited for any of the reasons listed in Attachment II, Tables A

through C.

D. Credential Attainment

Credential Attainment is the percentage of those participants enrolled in an education or training
program (excluding those in OJT and customized training) who attained a recognized
postsecondary credential or a secondary school diploma, or its recognized equivalent, during
participation in or within one year after exit from the program.

A participant who has attained a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent is
included in the percentage of participants who have attained a secondary school diploma or its

5 See Guidance for Validating Jointly Required Performance Data Submitted under the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (WIOA),joint guidance issued on December 19, 2018 via the OCTAE PM 19-1, ETA TEGL 07-18,
and RSA TAC 19-01.
8

---
Page 9

recognized equivalent only if the participant also is employed or is enrolled in an education or
training program leading to a recognized postsecondary credential within one year after exit from
the program.

Methodology:
Calculation includes all participants who exited from a program and were in either a
postsecondary education or training program (other than OJT and customized training) OR in a
secondary education program at or above the 9th grade level without a secondary school
diploma or its equivalent:

The number of participants who exited during the reporting period who obtained a recognized
postsecondary credential during the program or within one year after exit OR those who were in
a secondary education program and obtained a secondary school diploma or its recognized
equivalent during the program or within one year after exit and were also employed, or in an
education or training program leading to a recognized postsecondary credential within one year
after exit DIVIDED by the number of participants enrolled in an education or training program
(excluding those in OJT and customized training) who exited during the reporting period.

Operational Parameters:
This indicator measures attainment of two types of credentials: either a recognized postsecondary
credential or a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent.

Definition of a Recognized Postsecondary Credential:

A recognized postsecondary credential is defined as a credential consisting of an industry-

recognized certificate or certification, a certificate of completion of an apprenticeship, a license
recognized by the State involved or Federal government, or an associate or baccalaureate degree,
as well as graduate degrees for purposes of the VR program as permitted by section 103(a)(5)
and (18) of the Rehabilitation Act. A recognized postsecondary credential is awarded in
recognition of an individual’s attainment of measurable technical or industry/occupational skills
necessary to obtain employment or advance within an industry/occupation. These technical or
industry/occupational skills generally are based on standards developed or endorsed by
employers or industry associations.

Certificates awarded by workforce development boards (WDBs) and work readiness certificates
are not included in this definition because neither type of certificate is recognized industry-wide,
and they do not document the measurable technical or industry/occupational skills necessary to
gain employment or advancement within an occupation. Likewise, such certificates must
recognize technical or industry/occupational skills for the specific industry/occupation rather
than general skills related to safety, hygiene, etc., even if such general skills certificates are
broadly required to qualify for entry-level employment or advancement in employment.

Although these types of certificates may not count toward the credential attainment indicator,
these types of certifications may lead to positive outcomes in other performance indicators, so it
may be valuable to provide services that lead to such certificates, depending on the requirements
and eligibility for individual programs. Services that lead to these types of certificates often do
not meet the definition of training or education; therefore, in such cases those participants are
also excluded from the denominator of this measure.

Sections 766-769 of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended, authorize the Model
Comprehensive Transition and Postsecondary Programs for Students with Intellectual
Disabilities. ED provides grants to institutions of higher education or consortia of institutions of
9

---
Page 10

higher education to enable them to create or expand high quality, inclusive model comprehensive
transition and postsecondary programs for students with intellectual disabilities. These programs
support students with intellectual disabilities in continuing academic, career and technical, and
independent living instruction to prepare them for employment. Students may or may not earn a
recognized postsecondary credential upon completing these programs. Therefore, WIOA core
programs, particularly the VR program, must review whether participants who complete these
programs earn a credential that meets the definition of a recognized postsecondary credential.

A variety of different public and private entities issue recognized postsecondary credentials.

Below is a list of the types of organizations and institutions that award recognized postsecondary
credentials (not all credentials by these entities meet the definition of recognized postsecondary
credential).

• • A State educational agency or a State agency responsible for administering vocational
and technical education within a State;
• • An institution of higher education described in section 102 of the Higher Education Act
of 1965, as amended, (20 USC section 1002) that is qualified to participate in the student
financial assistance programs authorized by title IV of that Act. This includes community
colleges, proprietary schools, and all other institutions of higher education that are
eligible to participate in Federal student financial aid programs;
• • An institution of higher education that is formally controlled, or has been formally
sanctioned or chartered, by the governing body of an Indian tribe or tribes;

• • A professional, industry, or employer organization (e.g., National Institute for
Automotive Service Excellence certification, National Institute for Metalworking Skills,
Inc., Machining Level I credential) or product manufacturer or developer (e.g.,
recognized Microsoft Information Technology certificates, such as Microsoft Certified IT
Professional (MCITP), Certified Novell Engineer, a Sun Certified Java Programmer, etc.)
using a valid and reliable assessment of an individual’s knowledge, skills and abilities;
• • The Employment and Training Administration’s (ETA) Office of Apprenticeship or a
recognized State apprenticeship agency;
• • A public regulatory agency, which awards a credential upon an individual’s fulfillment of
educational, work experience, or skill requirements that are legally necessary for an
individual to use an occupational or professional title or to practice an occupation or
profession (e.g., Federal Aviation Administration aviation mechanic license or a State-
licensed asbestos inspector);

• • A program that has been approved by the Department of Veterans Affairs to offer
education benefits to veterans and other eligible persons; or
• • ETA’s Job Corps program, which issues certificates for completing career training
programs that are based on industry skills standards and certification requirements.

Definition of a Secondary School Diploma or Recognized Equivalent:

For purposes of the credential attainment performance indicator, a secondary school diploma (or
alternate diploma) (commonly referred to as regular high school diploma) is one that is
recognized by a State and that is included for accountability purposes under the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA), as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act
(ESSA). A secondary school equivalency certification signifies that a student has completed the
requirements for a high school education. The types of recognized equivalents, for those not
covered under ESEA, that would satisfy this performance indicator are those recognized by a

State.
10

---
Page 11

Examples of secondary school diplomas, alternate diplomas, and recognized equivalents
recognized by individual States include:

• • Obtaining certification of attaining passing scores on a State-recognized high school
equivalency test.
• • Earning a secondary school diploma or State-recognized equivalent through a credit

bearing secondary education program sanctioned by State law, code, or regulation.
• • Obtaining certification of passing a State recognized competency-based assessment.
• • Completion of a specified number of college credits.

Types of Acceptable Credentials: The following are acceptable types of credentials that count
toward the credential attainment indicator:

• • Secondary school diploma or recognized equivalent
• • Associate degree
• • Bachelor’s degree
• • Graduate degree for purposes of the VR program

• • Occupational licensure
• • Occupational certificate, including Registered Apprenticeship and Career and Technical
Education educational certificates
• • Occupational certification
• • Other recognized certificates of industry/occupational skills completion sufficient to
qualify for entry-level or advancement in employment.

Note: WIOA section 3(52) defines a recognized postsecondary credential as a credential
consisting of an industry-recognized certificate or certification, a certificate of completion of an
apprenticeship, a license recognized by the State involved or Federal Government, or an

associate or baccalaureate degree. Graduate degrees are not included in the definition of a
recognized postsecondary credential. Therefore, graduate degrees do not count toward credential
attainment, except for the title IV VR programs, which are permitted to include graduate degrees
as a type of recognized credential because of statutory and regulatory requirements specific to
that program.6

Who Is Included in the Denominator of the Credential Attainment Indicator: Not all
participants who exit will be included in the Credential Attainment denominator. Participants
who are enrolled in a postsecondary education or training program (except for OJT and
Customized Training) during participation, or who are enrolled in a secondary education
program (at or above the 9th grade level) without a secondary school diploma or equivalent
during participation, are included in the credential attainment denominator once they have
reached one year after exit, subject to the “Special Rule” below.

Special Rule Relating to Secondary School Diplomas and Recognized Equivalents in the
Calculation of the Credential Attainment Indicator: As required in WIOA section
116(b)(2)(A)(iii), participants who obtain a secondary school diploma or its recognized

equivalent must also meet an additional condition before they are counted as a successful
outcome and included in the numerator of the credential attainment indicator. These participants
must be employed or enrolled in an education or training program leading to a recognized
postsecondary credential within one year following exit.
6See sec. 103(a)(5) of the Rehabilitation Act; 34 CFR 361.48(b)(6); and 81 FR 55629, 55677 (Aug. 19, 2016).
11

---
Page 12

For each core program, a description of who is considered enrolled in an “education or training
program,” and thus included in the credential attainment indicator, follows:

• • Title I Adult and Dislocated Worker: All participants who are in a title I Adult- or
Dislocated Worker-funded training program or receiving training from a DOL partner
program that shares a common exit with title I Adult or Dislocated Worker, which was
not OJT or customized training, are included in the credential attainment indicator.

• • Title I Youth: All in-school Youth (ISY) are included in the credential attainment
indicator since they are attending secondary or postsecondary school at program entry.
Only out-of-school Youth (OSY) who participate in one of the following are included in
the credential attainment indicator:

the program element occupational skills training
o
the program element education offered concurrently with workforce preparation
o
secondary education at or above the 9th grade level during participation in the
o
title I Youth program
postsecondary education during participation in the title I Youth program
o
Title II-funded adult education at or above the 9th grade level during
o
participation in the title I Youth program
YouthBuild during participation in the title I Youth program
o
Job Corps during participation in the title I Youth program
o
• • Title II AEFLA: The following AEFLA program participants are included in this
measure:
For the secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent: Participants
o
without a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent at program
entry, who were enrolled in a secondary education program at or above the 9th
grade level.
For the recognized postsecondary credential: Participants who during the
o
program year were also enrolled in a postsecondary education or training
program leading to a recognized postsecondary credential and exited both the
postsecondary training program and the adult education program.
• • Title IV VR: The following VR program participants are included in this measure:
All participants who have participated in an educational or training program
o
leading to a postsecondary credential.
All participants who were enrolled in secondary education and who had the
o
attainment of a secondary school diploma or its equivalent identified on their
Individualized Plan for Employment (IPE) at some point during their period of
participation.
Exclusions from the Measure:
Participants who exited a program and who were enrolled in the following are excluded from the
credential attainment indicator:
• a. OJT only;
• b. Customized training only; or
• c. The title III Employment Service program (Wagner-Peyser) only.
12

---
Page 13

Also, participants who exit for any of the reasons listed in Attachment II, Tables A through C
are excluded from the credential attainment indicator.

E. Measurable Skill Gains

The measurable skill gains indicator is the percentage of participants who, during a program
year, are in an education or training program that leads to a recognized postsecondary credential
or employment and who are achieving documented academic, technical, occupational, or other

forms of progress, toward such a credential or employment (see 20 CFR § 677.155(a)(1)(v)).

The measurable skill gains indicator is used to measure interim progress of participants who are
enrolled in education or training services for a specified reporting period. Therefore, it is not an
exit-based measure. Instead, it is intended to capture important progressions through pathways
that offer different services based on program purposes and participant needs and can help fulfill
the vision for a workforce system that serves a diverse set of individuals with a range of services
tailored to individual needs and goals.

Depending upon the type of education or training program in which a participant is enrolled,
documented progress is defined as one of the following. Please note that the first three gain types
typically apply to participants in education, while gain types four and five typically apply to
participants in training.

Documented achievement of at least one educational functioning level of a participant
who is receiving instruction below the postsecondary education level;

Documented attainment of a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent;

Secondary or postsecondary transcript or report card for a sufficient number of credit
hours that shows a participant is meeting the State unit’s academic standards;

Satisfactory or better progress report, toward established milestones, such as completion
of OJT or completion of one year of an apprenticeship program or similar milestones,
from an employer or training provider who is providing training; or

Successful passage of an exam that is required for a particular occupation or progress in
attaining technical or occupational skills as evidenced by trade-related benchmarks, such
as knowledge-based exams.

Documenting Progress for Types of Measurable Skill Gains

Documented achievement of at least one educational functioning level of a
participant who is receiving instruction below the postsecondary level – Programs
may measure educational functioning level gain in one of four ways:

• (a) States may compare the participant’s initial educational functioning level, as
measured by a pre-test, with the participant’s educational functioning level, as
measured by a post-test;7

7 The approved pre- and post-tests must be based on the list of tests the Secretary of Education determines to be
suitable for use in the National Reporting System for Adult Education. The list of approved assessments is published
13

---
Page 14

• (b) States that offer adult high school programs that lead to a secondary school
diploma or its recognized equivalent may measure and report educational gain
through the awarding of credits or Carnegie units;
• (c) States may report an educational functioning level gain for participants who are
enrolled in a program below the postsecondary level and who enroll in State-
recognized postsecondary education or training during the program year. A
program below the postsecondary level applies to participants enrolled in a
basic education program; or
• (d) States may report an educational functioning level gain for participants who

pass a subtest on a State-recognized high school equivalency examination.

Documented attainment of a secondary school diploma8 or its recognized equivalent
– Programs may document attainment of a secondary school diploma or its recognized
equivalent if the participant obtains certification of attaining passing scores on all parts of
a State-recognized high school equivalency test, or the participant obtains a diploma or
State-recognized equivalent documenting satisfactory completion of secondary studies or
an alternate diploma,9 including a high school or adult secondary school diploma.

Secondary or postsecondary transcript or report card for a sufficient number of
credit hours that shows a participant is meeting the State unit’s academic standards
– For secondary education, this gain may be documented through receipt of a secondary
transcript10 or report card for one semester showing that the participant is achieving the
State unit’s policies for academic standards. For postsecondary education, this gain must
demonstrate a sufficient number of credit hours—which is at least 12 hours per semester
(or equivalent11) or, for part-time students, a total of at least 12 hours over the course of

two completed semesters (or equivalent) during a 12-month period that shows a
participant is achieving the State unit’s academic standards (or the equivalent for other
than credit hour programs). For example, if a postsecondary student completed 6 hours in
the spring semester and 6 more hours in the fall semester and those semesters crossed two
program years, they would not count as a skill gain in the first program year, but they
would count as a skill gain in the second program year.

Satisfactory or better progress report, toward established milestones, such as
completion of OJT or completion of one year of an apprenticeship program or
similar milestones, from an employer or training provider who is providing training
– Documentation for this gain may vary, as programs should identify appropriate
methodologies based upon the nature of services being provided, but progress reports
must document substantive skill development that the participant has achieved. The gain
may be documented by a satisfactory or better progress report from an employer or

annually in the Federal Register. For the most recent Federal Register notice, please visit
https://aefla.ed.gov/national-reporting-system and select the link “Tests Suitable for Use in the NRS.”
8 Secondary school diploma refers to a regular high school diploma, as defined in section 8101(43) of the ESEA, as
amended by the ESSA.
9 Alternate diploma must meet the requirements under the ESEA, as amended by the ESSA, as defined in section
8101(25)(A)(ii)(I)(bb). It is only for students with the most significant cognitive disabilities who take the State’s
alternate assessment based on alternate academic achievement standards, which can be no more than one percent of
all students in the State.
10 Secondary transcript is specific to youth attending high school.
11 For gain type three, the Departments recommend that States and local areas develop policies suitable for the
applicable academic system in use by the secondary or postsecondary institution in which the participant is enrolled
including, but not limited to, semesters, trimesters, quarters, and clock hours for the calculation of credit hours (or
their equivalent) when documenting progress toward Measurable Skill Gains.
14

---
Page 15

training provider. Progress reports may include training reports on milestones completed
as the individual masters the required job skills, or steps to complete an OJT or
apprenticeship program. Increases in pay resulting from newly acquired skills or
increased performance also can be used to document progress. Milestones should be
established in advance of the education or training program, or in advance of the program
year being measured, to be considered an “established milestone.”

Note: In the description of this type of Measurable Skill Gains, “completion of one year
of an apprenticeship” is just one example of a timeframe that may be established for

achieving a satisfactory or better progress report toward an established milestone, and the
“one year” timeframe should not be construed as a required timeframe or the only way
that a participant in an apprenticeship can achieve a Measurable Skill Gain.

Successful passage of an exam that is required for a particular occupation or
progress in attaining technical or occupational skills as evidenced by trade-related
benchmarks, such as knowledge-based exams – Documentation for this gain may
include passage of a component exam in a Registered Apprenticeship program,
employer-required knowledge-based exam, satisfactory attainment of an element on an
industry or occupational competency-based assessment, or other completion test
necessary to obtain a credential.

Methodology:
Calculation includes all participants:

The number of program participants during the reporting period who are in an education or

training program that leads to a recognized postsecondary credential or employment and are
achieving measurable skill gains based on attainment of at least one type of gain DIVIDED by
the number of program participants during the reporting period who are in an education or
training program that leads to a recognized postsecondary credential or employment.

Participants who, during any point in the program year, are in an education or training program
that leads to a recognized postsecondary credential or employment are included in the
denominator. This includes participants who continue to receive services as well as those who
have participated during the reporting period and have exited the program. Data for the
denominator in this calculation are drawn from PIRL 1811: Date Enrolled During Program
Participation in an Education or Training Program Leading to a Recognized Postsecondary
Credential or Employment and PIRL 1813: Date Completed During Program Participation an
Education or Training Program Leading to a Recognized Credential or Employment. The
denominator for this indicator includes all individuals where the range of dates between PIRL
1811 and PIRL 1813 (or the end of the report period if PIRL 1813 is null) overlaps with the
program year being measured. For title I and title IV VR, participants who complete their

education or training prior to the start of a program year, but have not exited and are still
receiving services, are not included in the denominator for program years that occur after their
completion date in PIRL 1813. If a participant starts a new education or training program after
the date reported in PIRL 1813, grantees must remove the date in PIRL 1813 and replace the date
in PIRL 1811 with the new education or training start date.

The numerator is the number of program participants defined above who achieved at least one
type of gain. A participant may have achieved more than one type of gain in a reporting period;
however, only one gain per participant in a reporting period may be used to calculate success on
the Measurable Skill Gains indicator.
15

---
Page 16

Operational Parameters:
All participants who, during a program year, are in an education or training program that leads to
a recognized postsecondary credential or employment are counted in the calculation of this
indicator. Participants who exit for any of the reasons listed in Attachment II, Tables A and B
are excluded from the measurable skill gains indicator. The following participants in education
or training programs are included:

• • Title I Adult and Dislocated Worker – All participants who are in a title I Adult- or

Dislocated Worker-funded training program, or training from a DOL partner program
that shares a common exit with title I Adult or Dislocated Worker, are included in the
Measurable Skill Gains indicator (which includes funding a training program for a
secondary school program equivalent). This includes all participants in work-based
training. (Refer to the Incumbent Worker Training section on page 43.)

• • Title I Youth – All ISY are included in the measurable skill gains indicator since they
are attending secondary or postsecondary school. Only OSY who are in one of the
following are included in the indicator:

the program element occupational skills training
o
the program element education offered concurrently with workforce preparation
o
secondary education during participation in the title I Youth program
o
postsecondary education during participation in the title I Youth program
o
Title II-funded adult education during participation in the title I Youth program
o
the YouthBuild program during participation in the title I Youth program
o
Job Corps during participation in the title I Youth program
o
• • Title II AEFLA – All participants in title II AEFLA programs are considered to be in an
education program leading to a recognized postsecondary credential or employment and,
as such, would be included in the measurable skill gains indicator.
• • Title IV VR – All VR program participants who are in an education or training program
that leads to a recognized secondary or postsecondary credential or employment, which is
identified on the individual’s IPE, would be included in the measurable skill gains
indicator.
Additional Operational Parameters:
• • Participants are only included in the denominator one time per reporting period (i.e.,
program year), regardless of how many skill gains they achieve in a given program year
unless the individual has more than one period of participation in a given program year.
Likewise, participants are only included in the numerator one time per reporting period
(i.e., program year), regardless of how many skill gains they achieve in a given program
year unless the individual has more than one period of participation in a given program
year (see Section 10, page 38, for discussion on periods of participation.);
• • A participant who exits the program and re-enrolls in the program during the same
program year and is in an education or training program will be in the indicator two times
for that particular program year, as explained in the discussion of periods of participation
in Section 9 of this guidance;

16

---
Page 17

• • The Measurable Skill Gains indicator is different from the other indicators because it is
not exit-based, meaning that a participant can achieve a measurable skill gain while still
participating in a program; and

• • Programs should not delay enrollment or services to participants until a new program
year even if programs believe there is insufficient time for the participant to make any

type of Measurable Skill Gain by the end of that program year.

For performance accountability purposes, the measurable skill gains indicator calculates the
number of participants who attain at least one type of gain during each period of participation
within a given program year. Since this indicator is not exit-based, each unique period of
participation in an education or training program triggers inclusion in the calculation.
Participants will achieve a successful outcome in the indicator as long as they attain one type of
gain applicable to the core programs. States should record all measurable skill gains achieved by
participants in a program year and report the most recent gain of each gain type, although only
one gain is required per participation period per program year to meet performance outcomes.
See the example below for how this would apply in a typical scenario.

Example

Chris enters an American Job Center and becomes a participant on October 2, 2022 (PY22). He
exits the program on February 10, 2023. During this time, Chris achieves two types of gain under
the measurable skill gains indicator.

He re-enters the program as a participant on June 11, 2023 (PY22). By the end of the program
year (June 30, 2023), he is still in his second participation period. During this time, Chris obtains
an additional type of gain under the measurable skill gains indicator.

In this example, Chris has two periods of participation and two positive outcomes on the
measurable skill gains indicator. Although two types of gain were achieved in the first period of
participation, only one of the two types of gains counts toward the indicator in the first
participation period. During the second period of participation, another type of gain was achieved
before the end of the program year, which counts as another positive outcome toward the
measurable skill gains indicator.

This information is collected, for all core programs (except the title III Employment Service
program), as part of the Measurable Skill Gains Report Template. If a participant achieves more
than one type of measurable skill gain in a reporting period, the most recent gain of each gain
type should be recorded on the Measurable Skill Gains Report Template.

Operational Parameters – Individual Core Programs:
The appropriate types of measurable skill gains for each core program are detailed in the table
below. These parameters are intended to focus performance accountability under measurable

skill gains on the services that are allowable under the respective statutory provisions.

17

Example
Chris enters an American Job Center and becomes a participant on October 2, 2022 (PY22). He
exits the program on February 10, 2023. During this time, Chris achieves two types of gain under
the measurable skill gains indicator.
He re-enters the program as a participant on June 11, 2023 (PY22). By the end of the program
year (June 30, 2023), he is still in his second participation period. During this time, Chris obtains
an additional type of gain under the measurable skill gains indicator.
In this example, Chris has two periods of participation and two positive outcomes on the
measurable skill gains indicator. Although two types of gain were achieved in the first period of
participation, only one of the two types of gains counts toward the indicator in the first
participation period. During the second period of participation, another type of gain was achieved
before the end of the program year, which counts as another positive outcome toward the
measurable skill gains indicator.
This information is collected, for all core programs (except the title III Employment Service
program), as part of the Measurable Skill Gains Report Template. If a participant achieves more
than one type of measurable skill gain in a reporting period, the most recent gain of each gain
type should be recorded on the Measurable Skill Gains Report Template.

---
Page 18

Operational Parameters – Individual Core Programs
Core Program Type of Measurable Skill Gains
Title I – Adult and Dislocated Worker  Measured by achievement of any of the 5 types of
Measurable Skill Gains
 No specific measurable skill gains types required
for specific Adult or Dislocated Worker
participants
Title I – Youth  Measured by achievement of any of the 5 types of
Measurable Skill Gains
 No specific measurable skill gains types required
for specific Youth participants
 Type of skill gain should be based on the youth’s
individual service strategy
Title II – AEFLA  For all participants, performance may be
measured by:
• - Achievement of at least one educational
functioning level, or
• - Documented attainment of a secondary school
diploma or its recognized equivalent.
 For participants enrolled in a workplace literacy
or integrated education and training program,
performance may be measured by achievement of
any of the 5 measurable skill gains.
Title IV – VR  May be measured by achievement of any of the 5
measurable skill gains.

F. Effectiveness in Serving Employers

Effectiveness in Serving Employers is the percentage of participants in unsubsidized
employment during the second quarter after exit who were employed by the same employer in
the second and the fourth quarters after exit.

Methodology:
Calculation includes all program participants:

The number of participants who exit during the reporting period and are found to be employed
by the same employer during the second quarter after exit and the fourth quarter after exit, either
through direct UI wage record match, Federal or military employment records, or supplemental
wage information DIVIDED by the number of participants who exited during the reporting
period and were employed during the second quarter after exit.

For this measure, States must report on data element 1618 (Retention with the Same Employer in
the 2nd Quarter and the 4th Quarter) in the WIOA Joint PIRL. This data element is calculated
based on a direct UI wage record match, Federal or military employment records, or
supplemental wage information for participants in their fourth quarter after exit. To count as a
successful outcome on this indicator, the participant’s employer must have the same identifier
(such as an employer Federal Employer Identification Number (FEIN) or State tax ID) in both
the second and fourth quarters after exit. This creates the numerator for this indicator. The
denominator for this indicator is the number of participants who exited during the reporting
period and who were employed in the second quarter after exit.

18

Operational Parameters – Individual Core Programs
Core Program Type of Measurable Skill Gains
| Title I – Adult and Dislocated Worker | | |  Measured by achievement of any of the 5 types of
Measurable Skill Gains
 No specific measurable skill gains types required
for specific Adult or Dislocated Worker
participants | | |
| Title I – Youth | | |  Measured by achievement of any of the 5 types of
Measurable Skill Gains
 No specific measurable skill gains types required
for specific Youth participants
 Type of skill gain should be based on the youth’s
individual service strategy | | |
| Title II – AEFLA | | |  For all participants, performance may be
measured by:
• Achievement of at least one educational
functioning level, or
• Documented attainment of a secondary school
diploma or its recognized equivalent.
 For participants enrolled in a workplace literacy
or integrated education and training program,
performance may be measured by achievement of
any of the 5 measurable skill gains. | | |
| Title IV – VR | | |  May be measured by achievement of any of the 5
measurable skill gains. | | |

---
Page 19

Operational Parameters:
When calculating levels of performance for this indicator, States must include all participants
exiting the title I Adult, title I Dislocated Worker, title I Youth, title II AEFLA, title III
Employment Service, and title IV VR programs who were employed in unsubsidized
employment in the second quarter after exit; however, States must not include (in either the
numerator or denominator) those participants who exit during the reporting period for any of the
reasons listed in Attachment II, Table A or Attachment II, Table C (PIRL 923) regarding
exclusions.

Reporting as a Shared Indicator:
Unlike the other primary indicators of performance, which are reported separately for each core
program, the effectiveness in serving employers indicator is reported as a shared indicator across
all six – one value that combines the results for all the core programs in the State. Each State
must designate a single agency to submit the State’s unduplicated, aggregated annual results for
all six core programs in the State in the ETA-9169 for Effectiveness in Serving Employers to
DOL. While States have flexibility in determining each State agency’s data collection
responsibilities, the Departments encourage each State, to the extent feasible, to centralize the
coordination of data collection and reporting of this indicator into a single agency for their State.
Since the measure is largely dependent on UI wage data, the Departments recommend that States
designate the State title I or title III agency for this responsibility as they are likely best
positioned to report this measure for the State.

Categories of Enrollment: Reportable Individual, Participant, & Date of Program Exit.

Reportable Individual: The category of reportable individual, as set forth in 20 CFR §

677.150(b), 34 CFR § 361.150(b), and 34 CFR § 463.150(b), allows the Departments to identify
the individuals who engaged with the workforce development system on an initial level. By
definition, this includes two categories: (1) those individuals who are also participants in a given
program and (2) those who do not meet the requirements to become a participant. For the
purposes of performance reporting, the second category is what this guidance refers to as
“reportable individuals” and when the Departments report on reportable individuals it only refers
to this category to avoid double counting of participants.12 The Departments will use this
category to track the number of individuals who may take part in self-services, receive
information-only services or activities, or those who do not complete the program requirements
for eligibility or for participation. A reportable individual is an individual who has taken action
that demonstrates an intent to use program services and who meets specific reporting criteria of
the program, including:

1) Individuals who provide identifying information (including those what are
determined ineligible to become a participant for a particular program);
2) Individuals who only use the self-service system;

3) Individuals who only receive information-only services or activities; or
4) For purposes of the title IV VR program only, a student with a disability who solely
receives pre-employment transition services and who does not apply for VR services,
who is not determined eligible, and who does not have an approved IPE.

12 The Department of Labor has produced a tool with more information on Reportable Individuals, titled
Understanding Reportable Individuals and Participants for Performance: A Guide to Reporting Services that can be
found at https://performancereporting.workforcegps.org/resources/2017/08/01/09/32/Understanding-Reportable-
Individuals-and-Participants-for-Performance-A-Guide-to-Reporting-Services
19

---
Page 20

The Departments will not negotiate levels of performance or impose sanctions based on the
outcomes of reportable individuals because only “participants” are included in the performance
indicators. However, the Departments require inclusion of certain information about reportable
individuals in the State annual performance reports and associated WIOA performance reporting
instruments or program-specific performance reporting instruments. For example, the
Departments will track the number of individuals taking part in self-services, receiving
information-only services or activities, or failing to complete the program requirements for
eligibility or participation. Collecting such information allows the Departments to identify the
individuals who engaged with the system on an initial level but who do not become participants,

which allows the system to accurately represent the number of individuals served by the system.

Titles I and III Programs – Reportable Individuals period of activity:

Although a reportable individual does not “exit” as defined in 677.150(c), because they are never
considered a participant, a new period of reportable individual activity occurs when more than 90
consecutive days have elapsed since the last service or activity (including provision of
identifying information) occurred.

Title II AEFLA Program – Reportable Individuals period of activity:

Although a reportable individual does not “exit” as defined in 463.150(c), for tracking purposes a
reportable individual will eventually stop being reported and, therefore, a reportable individual is
“exited” when 90 days have elapsed since the last date of service and no future services are
planned. This means the individual has had 90 days of no services, including self-service and
information-only service, since being identified as a reportable individual (see 34 CFR §
463.150(c)(1)).

Title IV VR Program – Reportable Individuals period of activity:

Although a reportable individual does not “exit” as defined in 361.150(c), for tracking purposes
it is necessary to determine when a reportable individual stops being a reportable individual. For
a student with a disability who solely receives pre-employment transition services and does not
apply to the VR program, the VR agency discontinues reporting when the individual no longer
meets the definition of a student with a disability, as reported in RSA-911 data element 22. Once
a student with a disability receives a pre-employment transition service, the student must be
reported on the RSA-911 even if the student is not receiving a pre-employment transition service
in a quarter if the student meets the definition of a student with a disability. However, if a student
with a disability has applied and been determined eligible for VR services and has an approved
and signed IPE, the student’s service record would be “closed” when the student satisfies the
definition of “exit” at 34 CFR 361.150(c) because his or her service record is closed pursuant to
34 CFR 361.43 or 361.56. At that time, the student would be considered to have exited the VR
program for purposes of WIOA’s performance accountability system as a participant. For all
other reportable individuals under the VR program, the individual will be determined to have
“exited” the VR program as of the date reported in RSA-911 data element 353 (Date of Exit).

Participant: Although the definition of participant is consistent across the core programs, there

are some slight differences to account for programmatic requirements. As mentioned above,
while all participants are technically considered reportable individuals, not all reportable
individuals meet the requirements to become participants. For the WIOA title I Adult, title I
Dislocated Worker, and title III Employment Service programs, a participant is a reportable
individual who has received services other than the services described in 20 CFR § 677.150(a)(3)
20

---
Page 21

after satisfying all applicable programmatic requirements for the provision of services, such as
eligibility determination.

For the WIOA title II AEFLA program, a participant is a reportable individual who has received
services other than the services described in 34 CFR § 463.150(a)(3), after satisfying all
applicable programmatic requirements for the provision of services, such as eligibility
determination.

As set forth in more detail in 20 CFR § 677.150(a)(3), 34 CFR § 361.150(a)(3), and 34 CFR §

463.150(a)(3), as applicable, the following individuals are not participants:

• • Individuals in an AEFLA program who have not completed at least 12 contact hours;
• • Individuals who only use the self-service system; and
• • Individuals who receive information-only services or activities, which provide readily
available information that does not require an assessment by a staff member of the
individual’s skills, education, or career objectives.

For the title I Youth program, a participant is a reportable individual who has satisfied all
applicable program requirements for the provision of services, including eligibility
determination, an objective assessment, and development of an individual service strategy, and
received one or more of the 14 WIOA Youth program elements identified in section 129(c)(2) of
WIOA.

For the title IV VR program, a participant is a reportable individual who has applied and been
determined eligible for VR services, has an approved and signed IPE, and has begun to receive
services under the IPE.

In summary, a participant is an individual who:

• (1) Meets the definition of reportable individual;
• (2) Has received services other than the services described in 20 CFR § 677.150(a)(3), 34
CFR § 361.150(a)(3), or 34 CFR § 463.150(a)(3), as applicable; and
• (3) Has satisfied all applicable programmatic requirements for the provision of services.

The Departments will negotiate levels of performance and assess performance based on the
outcomes of participants because the performance indicators are based on the experience of
participants during or after program participation, as applicable.

Programmatic Criteria for Becoming a Participant in Each of the Core Programs:
Due to the variability in programmatic criteria to receive services, the particular services that
trigger inclusion as a participant vary across the core programs:

• • Title I Adult and Dislocated Worker – Receipt of any training services or
individualized career services makes a reportable individual a participant. For basic
career services, a reportable individual becomes a participant when he or she receives a
service that is neither self-service nor information-only. See the chart in Attachment
VII, Table A, which lists types of services received; identifies those services as basic
career services, individualized career services, or training services; and states whether
each type of service triggers inclusion in participation for the title I Adult and Dislocated
Worker programs and for the title III Employment Service program.

21

---
Page 22

• • Title I Youth – When a reportable individual has satisfied all applicable program
requirements for the provision of services, including eligibility determination, an
objective assessment, development of an individual service strategy, and received one of
the 14 WIOA Youth program elements (other than the program element follow-up
services) identified in section 129(c)(2) of WIOA, he or she is considered a participant.
See the chart in Attachment VII, Table B.

• • Title II AEFLA – When a reportable individual in an AEFLA program has completed at

least 12 contact hours he or she is considered a participant.

• • Title III Employment Service – When a reportable individual receives an individualized
career service, he or she is considered a participant. For basic career services, a reportable
individual becomes a participant when he or she receives a service that is neither self-
service nor information-only. See the chart in Attachment VII, Table A.

• • Title IV VR – When a reportable individual has applied and been determined eligible for
VR services, has an approved and signed IPE, and has begun to receive services under
the IPE, he or she is considered a participant. The date the individual begins receiving
services under the IPE corresponds with data element 127 on the RSA-911.

Exit: Exit from a program, as set forth in 20 CFR § 677.150(c), 34 CFR § 361.150(c), and 34
CFR § 463.150(c), generally occurs, as described below, when the participant has not received
services for a specified period of time and has no additional services scheduled. The title IV VR
program has a consistent, but slightly different, definition of exit to account for programmatic
requirements.

When future services are scheduled more than 90 days after the most recent date of service, such
as might happen when there is a delay before the beginning of training, grantees should make
sure that these participants are not automatically exited from their Management Information
System (MIS) when 90 days have elapsed. Grantees must document that these future services
have been scheduled when necessary in those rare instances where future services are needed to
take place more than 90 days out.

Follow-up services do not change or delay exit as they may occur after exit in title I Adult and
Dislocated Worker programs and can only occur after exit in the title I Youth program.13 States
must count each exit of a participant during the same program year as a separate period of
participation if a participant has more than one exit in a program year. Note that “follow-up
services” refers to an allowable type of service in WIOA title I that takes place after placement
into unsubsidized employment and mostly occur after exit, while the term “future services”
refers to services that are provided to active participants (such as training) but that are scheduled
to take place at a future date.

13 Supportive services also do not delay exit. For the title I Adult and Dislocated Worker programs only participants
may receive supportive services. The definition of supportive services for these programs requires that they may not
be provided to an individual who would otherwise not be considered a participant. Additionally, for the title I Youth
program, supportive services can be provided as a follow-up service and, therefore, can take place after exit without
delaying the exit date. For the title IV VR program, support services can be provided after the individual begins
employment without delaying the exit date.
22

---
Page 23

Program-Specific Criteria of Exit:

• • Title I Adult, Dislocated Worker and Youth; Title II AEFLA; and Title III
Employment Service programs – The date of exit from the program is the last date of
service. Specifically:

The date of exit cannot be determined until 90 days have elapsed since the
o
participant last received services; furthermore, there must be no plans to provide
the participant with future services. At that point, the date of exit is applied
retroactively to the last date of service.

For determining whether 90 days have elapsed since the participant last received
o
services, do not include receipt by the participant of any self-service, information-
only services or activities, or follow-up services, as these services do not delay,
postpone, or affect the date of exit. Because the date of exit is retroactive to the
last date of service, follow-up services in the title I Adult and Dislocated Worker
programs may begin immediately following placement into unsubsidized
employment if it is expected that the participant will not receive any future
services other than follow-up services. For the title I Youth program, follow-up
services may begin immediately following the last date of service if it is expected
that the participant will not receive any future services other than follow-up
services. Provision of follow-up services does not extend the date of exit.
PIRL data element 901 (Date of Program Exit) is used to collect and report the
o
date of exit. For exit-based performance measures, the quarter for collecting
follow-up data is determined by the quarter in which the date of exit occurs. For
example, if the date of exit is between January 1st and March 31st, the first
quarter after exit would be April 1st through June 30th.

• • Title IV VR program –

The participant’s record of service is closed in accordance with 34 CFR § 361.56
o
because the participant has achieved an employment outcome; or the individual
has not achieved an employment outcome or the individual has been determined
ineligible after receiving services in accordance with 34 CFR § 361.43.
VR program participants are not considered to have exited if the service record is
o
closed because the participant has achieved a supported employment outcome in
an integrated setting, but not in competitive integrated employment.

The RSA-911 data element 353 (Date of Exit) is the VR equivalent of PIRL data
o
element 901 (Date of Program Exit). For VR program participants who have
achieved an employment outcome, the exit date is at least 90 days after the
attainment of the employment outcome and the individual has met the
requirements under 34 CFR 361.56. For VR program participants who have not
achieved an employment outcome or have been determined ineligible after
receiving services in accordance with 34 CFR 361.43, the exit is based on the date
of the determination to close the service record.

23

---
Page 24

Common Exit for DOL–Administered Programs Only:

DOL encourages States to use a “common exit” for DOL-administered programs, and it
envisions full implementation of a common exit across the DOL-administered core programs
within each State. While DOL encourages States that implement common exit policies to include
all DOL-administered non-core programs within the scope of each State’s common exit policy,
DOL recognizes the challenges this potentially poses. The decision of whether to implement a
common exit policy, or to include DOL-administered non-core programs within that policy, is
ultimately left to each State, subject to the following requirements and exceptions. The WIOA

final rule allows for States to establish common exit policies that include any of the DOL-
administered non-core programs (as defined in Appendix II) except for the H-1B Job Training
Programs, which are not included in the list of required one-stop partners in WIOA section
121(b)(1)(B).

A “common exit” occurs when a participant, enrolled in multiple DOL-administered partner
programs, has not received services from any DOL-administered program to which the common
exit policy applies for at least 90 days, and no future services are planned. States that retain or
develop a common exit policy must require that a participant is only exited when all the criteria
for exit are met for the WIOA titles I and III core programs to which the common exit policy
applies, as well as any additional DOL-administered required partner programs to which the
State’s common exit policy applies in which the participant is enrolled. The WIOA title I and
title III core programs are:

• • WIOA title I Adult program;

• • WIOA title I Dislocated Worker program;
• • WIOA title I Youth formula program; and
• • Wagner-Peyser Act Employment Service program.

Additionally, DOL encourages the additional required partner programs listed in section
121(b)(1)(B) of WIOA (i.e., the title I non-core programs) that are under the authority of DOL to
be included in the common exit policy. Those partner programs, which may14 be included in a
common exit policy, are as follows:

• • Job Corps program, under WIOA section 141 et seq.;
• • Native American programs, under WIOA section 166;

• • National Farmworker Jobs program, under WIOA section 167;
• • National Dislocated Worker Grants, under WIOA section 170;
• • YouthBuild program, under WIOA section 171;
• • Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP), authorized under title V of
the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3056 et seq.);
• • Trade Adjustment Assistance program (TAA), authorized under chapter 2 of title II of the
Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2271 et seq.);
• • Jobs for Veterans State Grants program (JVSG), authorized under chapter 41 of title 38,
United States Code; and
• • Reentry Employment Opportunities program (REO)

If a State chooses to retain or implement a common exit policy, the policy must require that a
participant is “exited” when that individual has not received services for 90 days, and no future

14 Some programs may be required to be included in the common exit policy. Grantees should refer to guidance
specific to these programs for more information.
24

---
Page 25

services are planned (with the exception of self-service, information-only activities, or follow-up
services) from any of the DOL-administered programs to which the common exit policy applies,
in which the participant is enrolled.

States must identify the programs for which they have adopted a common exit policy in their
annual narrative reports described in TEGL 05-18.15 Additionally, States will identify in the
Quarterly Performance Report Template (ETA-9173) the programs that share a common exit
with the program being reported.

Self-Service and Information-Only Activities.

Workforce development system programs offer many services to the public, both virtually and in
person, that are general in nature and not customized to an individual’s needs. These are
commonly known as self-services or information-only services or activities. These services do
not constitute participation in a program. Therefore, individuals who receive only self-services or
information-only services or activities are considered reportable individuals, not participants.

As described in 20 CFR § 677.150(a)(3)(ii)(A), 34 CFR § 363.150(a)(3)(ii)(A), and 34 CFR §
461.150(a)(3)(ii)(A), self-service occurs when individuals independently access any workforce
development system program’s information and activities in either a physical location, such as an
American Job Center resource room or partner agency, or remotely via the use of electronic
technologies.

However, it is important to note that not all virtual services are considered self-service. Any
individual who accesses services virtually and who is provided a level of support from WIOA

program staff beyond independent job or information-seeking would not qualify as self-service.
This more intensive level of service would qualify the individual as a participant.

Information-only services or activities are those that provide readily available information that
does not require an assessment by a staff member of the individual’s skills, education, or career
objectives. For further information on reportable individuals under the title I Adult and
Dislocated Worker programs and on the title III Employment Service program, refer to
Understanding Reportable Individuals and Participants for Performance: A Guide to Reporting
Services at https://ion.workforcegps.org/resources/2017/02/22/07/41/Understanding-Reportable-
Individuals-and-Participants-for-Performance-A-Guide-to-Reporting-Services. Please note that
this guide is based on the information in this section and on Attachment VII, Table A of this
guidance.

Period of Participation.

For all indicators, a period of participation refers to the period of time beginning when an

individual becomes a participant and ending on the participant’s date of exit from the program.
States must count each participant’s exit during the same program year as a separate period of
participation for purposes of calculating levels of performance. For all indicators, except the
measurable skill gains indicator, a new period of participation is counted each time a participant
re-enters and exits the program—even if both exits occur during the same program year. For the
Measurable Skill Gains indicator, both periods of participation are counted even if they do not
exit during the program year for the second period of participation, as both enrollments occur

15 See Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) Annual Statewide Performance Report Narrative¸ issued
November 14, 2018, DOL Employment and Training Administration Training and Employment Guidance Letter
• (TEGL) 05-18, https://wdr.doleta.gov/directives/corr_doc.cfm?DOCN=3118.
25

---
Page 26

within the same program year and Measurable Skill Gains is not an exit-based indicator. The
skill gain may be counted as soon as it is earned at any point during the program year in which it
was earned. Attachment V illustrates the counting of periods of participation and its relation to
each performance indicator.

A person with more than one period of participation in a program year is counted separately for
each period of participation in both the numerator and denominator of each applicable
performance indicator. Therefore, the person is counted multiple times—once for each period of
participation. Specific examples of counting periods of participation are included in Attachment

VI.

State levels of performance on all primary indicators under WIOA are calculated as a percentage
of the number of outcomes achieved for each reporting period (whether quarterly or annually, as
applicable) by the number of periods of participation during the same reporting period.

Reporting Unique Participants

The Departments have determined it necessary to calculate the unique number of participants
being served each program year, by each core program. As a result, it is likely that many States
and programs will need to modify their data systems and processes to be able to track each
period of participation (i.e., a duplicate count) while also retaining the ability to calculate an
unduplicated count of individual participants across multiple periods of participation in any
given program year.

To meet this requirement, States must:

Develop systems to track multiple periods of participation within a program year;
Calculate a unique count of individual participants across multiple periods of
participation in any given program year; and
Establish a unique identification number that will be retained by the same individual
across multiple programs.

Note that the Departments will not accept an SSN as a form of unique identifier unless
specifically noted and required under the particular program.

Career Service and Training Service Guidance.

WIOA section 116(d)(2) specifies the data elements and outcomes to be included in the
Statewide Annual Performance report for WIOA core programs. One of those elements is: “the
average cost per participant of those participants who received career and training services,
respectively, during the most recent program year and the three preceding program years”

(section 116(d)(2)(F) of WIOA). WIOA provides specific definitions for career services (section
134(c)(2)), training services (section 134(c)(3)), and administrative costs (section 3(1)).

Classifying Career Services and Training Services

When the definitions of career services and training services do not directly correlate to all the
services provided by a core program, the Departments have developed separate tables in
Attachment VII, Tables A through D of this TEGL identifying which specific services are to
be classified as career services and which services are to be classified as training services. When
a program service includes components of both career services and training services, the
26

---
Page 27

programs must use those tables to determine which category will be used to ensure uniform
reporting among all States and agencies. It may not be possible to classify all of a program’s
services as either a career or a training service. In other words, a program may provide services
that go beyond the scope of career services and training services (e.g., follow-up services, for
participants in the title I Adult, Dislocated Worker, or Youth program, or instructional or
program services, for participants in the title II AEFLA program). In such instances, the program
must report only those services that satisfy the definition of career services and training services
for this particular reporting purpose.

Identifying Career Services and Training Service Costs

WIOA requires that the costs for career and training services be determined separately. Given
that WIOA defines “administrative costs” separately from the definitions of career services and
training services, the Departments made clear in the WIOA Performance ICR that States must
not include administrative costs when reporting costs for career services and costs for training
services.

Career and training costs include any career service or training service provided by a core
program, regardless of whether the service occurred “at” a one-stop center. Each of the data
elements required by section 116(d)(2) is presented in the context of activities performed and
services provided by the core programs, with no specificity that the activities or services be
provided in a one-stop center. Additionally, section 121(b)(1)(A)(i) of WIOA states that one-stop
partners must “provide access through the one-stop delivery system to such program or activities
carried out by the entity, including making the career services described in section 134(c)(2) that
are applicable to the program or activities available at the one-stop centers (in addition to any

other appropriate locations).”

Therefore, consistent with the statutory requirement, at least some career services must be
provided at the American Job Center. However, not all partners must provide career services at
the American Job Center.

Calculating Career Service and Training Service Costs

Career Service Costs
The calculation for the cost of providing career services described in section 134(c)(2):

 Title I Adult, title I Dislocated Worker, title I Youth, title III Employment
Service, and title IV VR programs:

Career Services Costs = Total Expenditures for Career Services / Total Participants
receiving Career Services in the Program

 Title II AEFLA program:

Career Services Costs = Total Expenditures for Career Services / Total participants
receiving Career Services in the Program.

Core programs define the numerator in the calculation of career service costs differently;
therefore, the numerator for each should be adjusted accordingly as follows:

27

Career Service Costs
The calculation for the cost of providing career services described in section 134(c)(2):
 Title I Adult, title I Dislocated Worker, title I Youth, title III Employment
Service, and title IV VR programs:
Career Services Costs = Total Expenditures for Career Services / Total Participants
receiving Career Services in the Program
 Title II AEFLA program:
Career Services Costs = Total Expenditures for Career Services / Total participants
receiving Career Services in the Program.
Core programs define the numerator in the calculation of career service costs differently;
therefore, the numerator for each should be adjusted accordingly as follows:

---
Page 28

 Title I Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth16 programs:
Total Expenditures for Career Services is calculated by subtracting the sum of
administrative expenditures and training expenditures from total expenditures. It is
important to note that the costs incurred by these particular programs are
categorized only as costs for career services, training services, and administrative
costs.

 Title II AEFLA program:
Total Expenditures for Career Services is the sum of expenditures for career
services indicated in Attachment VII, Table C, provided by the Program.

 Title III Employment Service:
Total Expenditures for Career Services is calculated by subtracting the sum of
administrative expenditures from total expenditures. It is important to note that the

costs incurred by this particular program are categorized only as costs for career
services and administrative costs.
 Title IV VR program:

Total Expenditures for Career Services is the sum of the costs of purchased career
services and career services provided directly by VR agency staff. The Total
Participants Receiving Career Services in the Program is the total number of
participants receiving either purchased career services or career services provided
directly by VR agency staff.

Training Service Costs
 Average Cost of Training Services per Participant = Total expenditures for
Training Services (not including administrative costs) / the total number of
participants receiving such services.

Calculating Training Service Costs – Special Circumstances

 Calculating Training Service costs when a participant is enrolled in a training

program that spans program years:

Training cost should be reported as they were expended in each year if the total
expenditures for each year can be determined. If only the total cost of training
across several program years is known, the total costs should be reported in evenly
distributed amounts across program years.

 Calculating training service costs when a participant is co-enrolled and the partner
program is contributing to the training (i.e., shared costs):
If participants are co-enrolled and a partner program is contributing to training
costs, States should only report the portion of training costs paid by the program
completing the statewide performance report. The partner program should report its
share of the training costs on its own statewide performance report.

16 For title I Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth programs; DOL has developed a tool to help grantees determine
which activities fall into which categories for calculating career and training services costs.
https://performancereporting.workforcegps.org/resources/2019/07/05/13/29/Cost-Per-Participant-Tool-WIOA-
Annual-Performance-Report
28

 Title I Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth16 programs:
Total Expenditures for Career Services is calculated by subtracting the sum of
administrative expenditures and training expenditures from total expenditures. It is
important to note that the costs incurred by these particular programs are
categorized only as costs for career services, training services, and administrative
costs.
 Title II AEFLA program:
Total Expenditures for Career Services is the sum of expenditures for career
services indicated in Attachment VII, Table C, provided by the Program.
 Title III Employment Service:
Total Expenditures for Career Services is calculated by subtracting the sum of
administrative expenditures from total expenditures. It is important to note that the
costs incurred by this particular program are categorized only as costs for career
services and administrative costs.
 Title IV VR program:
Total Expenditures for Career Services is the sum of the costs of purchased career
services and career services provided directly by VR agency staff. The Total
Participants Receiving Career Services in the Program is the total number of
participants receiving either purchased career services or career services provided
directly by VR agency staff.
Training Service Costs
 Average Cost of Training Services per Participant = Total expenditures for
Training Services (not including administrative costs) / the total number of
participants receiving such services.
Calculating Training Service Costs – Special Circumstances
 Calculating Training Service costs when a participant is enrolled in a training
program that spans program years:
Training cost should be reported as they were expended in each year if the total
expenditures for each year can be determined. If only the total cost of training
across several program years is known, the total costs should be reported in evenly
distributed amounts across program years.
 Calculating training service costs when a participant is co-enrolled and the partner
program is contributing to the training (i.e., shared costs):
If participants are co-enrolled and a partner program is contributing to training
costs, States should only report the portion of training costs paid by the program
completing the statewide performance report. The partner program should report its
share of the training costs on its own statewide performance report.

---
Page 29

 Title I Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth programs:
Training costs for title I programs use the same definitions that are used for training
expenditures (including Incumbent Worker Training expenditures, as appropriate)
in the ETA-9130 financial reports for each program.

 Title II AEFLA program:
Total Expenditures for Training Services is the sum of expenditures for training
services indicated in Attachment VII, Table C, provided by the Program.

 Title III Employment Service:

There are no training costs associated with the Employment Service.
 Title IV VR program:

Total Expenditures for Training Services is the sum of the costs of purchased
training services and training services provided directly by VR agency staff. The
Total Participants Receiving Training Services in the Program is the total number
of participants receiving either purchased training services or training services
provided directly by VR agency staff.

Note: A participant who receives more than one career service during the participant’s period of
participation is included in the denominator for the career services calculation only one time. The
costs of all the career services the participant received are included in the numerator. Similarly, a
participant who receives more than one training service during the participant’s period of
participation is included in the denominator for the training services calculation only one time.
The costs of all the training services the participant received are included in the numerator.
However, if a participant has multiple periods of participation during a program year, the
participant will appear in the denominator of the career and training services calculations more
than one time.

For WIOA title I Adult, Dislocated Worker and Youth programs and title III Employment
Service programs, a participant who receives career services or training services from multiple
programs (e.g., title I Adult and Dislocated Worker) will be counted in the respective career
services or training service denominator for all the programs from which they received services.

Each core program will establish a process for separating the administrative costs from career
service and training service costs.

Incumbent Worker Training (IWT) Under Title I

For the WIOA title I Adult and Dislocated Worker programs, local WDBs may use up to 20
percent of their total Adult and Dislocated Worker formula allocation to provide IWT (see
WIOA section 134(d)(4)). The Departments do not consider individuals who receive only IWT
to be participants required for inclusion in the WIOA performance indicator calculations.
Therefore, individuals who receive only IWT are not included in WIOA performance indicator
calculations for the core programs. However, individuals who receive only IWT are considered

reportable individuals. This means that for individuals who receive only IWT, states must also
report elements that apply to Reportable Individuals under title I, including DOL-only PIRL
1007 (Date of Most Recent Reportable Individual Contact).

The Departments do not consider individuals receiving IWT to be participants for the purpose of
inclusion in WIOA performance indicator calculations because of WIOA section 134(d)(4)’s
29

 Title I Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth programs:
Training costs for title I programs use the same definitions that are used for training
expenditures (including Incumbent Worker Training expenditures, as appropriate)
in the ETA-9130 financial reports for each program.
 Title II AEFLA program:
Total Expenditures for Training Services is the sum of expenditures for training
services indicated in Attachment VII, Table C, provided by the Program.
 Title III Employment Service:
There are no training costs associated with the Employment Service.
 Title IV VR program:
Total Expenditures for Training Services is the sum of the costs of purchased
training services and training services provided directly by VR agency staff. The
Total Participants Receiving Training Services in the Program is the total number
of participants receiving either purchased training services or training services
provided directly by VR agency staff.

---
Page 30

unique eligibility requirements. Unlike other types of training, incumbent worker eligibility is
determined at the employer level by the local WDB, which determines if the employer is eligible
to have its employees receive IWT. There is no separate determination of the eligibility of any
particular employee to receive IWT. Therefore, an incumbent worker does not have to meet the
eligibility requirements for career services and training services for the Adult and Dislocated
Worker programs under WIOA. However, if the incumbent worker meets eligibility
requirements, they may also be enrolled as a participant and receive other services from the
WIOA Adult or Dislocated Worker programs or be a participant in a separate WIOA program. In
that case, their participation would be reported under the appropriate WIOA indicator of

performance. This means that there are two distinct categories of IWT recipients, those that are
participants and are reported according to the same guidelines as any other participant receiving
training, and those who are reportable individuals who are receiving IWT. All recipients of IWT
must be reported in the DOL-only PIRL under data element number 907 (Recipient of Incumbent
Worker Training), regardless of whether they become a participant in one of the WIOA
programs.

The Departments also encourage the collection of incumbent worker SSNs as part of the training
contract with the employer so that wage records will be available for these individuals. If no SSN
is available, the State or Local WDB may use supplemental wage information to verify the
wages reported. Incumbent worker training that is funded with Statewide Rapid Response funds
(data element 908 in the DOL-only PIRL) under WIOA section 134(a)(2)(A)(i)(I) must also be
reported under DOL-only PIRL data element 1501 (Most Recent Date Received Rapid Response
Services).

Special Conditions for Reportable Individuals Receiving IWT

Unlike other reportable individuals, although reportable individuals receiving IWT are not

participants for the purpose of inclusion in WIOA performance indicator calculations, States and
local areas are still required to report certain participant and performance data on all reportable
individuals who receive only incumbent worker training. The required elements for these type of
incumbent worker individuals are limited to the appropriate reportable individual code (“4” in
PIRL 903 or PIRL 904), basic information, and the outcome elements needed to calculate
incumbent worker training performance indicators for employment in the 2nd and 4th quarters
after exit, Median earnings in the 2nd quarter after exit, Measurable Skill Gains, and Credential
Attainment (see Attachment VIII for specific list of required elements). Since reportable
individuals do not report a Date of Program Entry or Date of Program Exit, the Departments will
reference the most recent date completed or withdrew from training to establish the cohorts for
measuring outcomes for individuals who have only received IWT. Reportable individuals
receiving IWT through the title I Adult or Dislocated Worker programs must be reported in PIRL
907 using code values 1, 2, or 3. State and local boards may require additional elements be
reported to collect additional information on incumbent workers, which, if collected, should also
be reported through the PIRL.

Performance Score Calculation.

The calculations of performance scores and sanctions determination process are discussed in
greater detail in the Departments’ joint guidance on negotiations and sanctions.17

17 See Negotiations and Sanctions Guidance for the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) Core
Programs, joint guidance issued on May 10, 2023, via the OCTAE PM 20-2, ETA TEGL 11-19, and RSA TAC 20-
30

---
Page 31

INQUIRIES:

Christopher Pope, Chief
Data Collection and Analysis Unit
Christopher.Pope@ed.gov

CITATIONS:

Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, Pub. L. 113-128

Elementary and Secondary Education Act, as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act, 20
U.S.C 6301, et seq.

Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Joint Rule for United and Combined State Plans,
Performance Accountability, and the One-Stop System Joint Provisions, 81 Fed. Reg. 55791
(Aug. 19, 2016)

/s/
Danté Q. Allen
Commissioner

Attachments

31

---
Page 32

Attachment I

Definitions of Terms Related to the Performance Accountability System

• • Common Exit – occurs when a participant, enrolled in multiple partner programs, has not
received services from any DOL-administered program in which the participant is enrolled,
to which the common exit policy applies, for at least 90 days, and no future services are

planned.

• • Competitive Integrated Employment – in general, for individuals with disabilities, work
performed by an individual on a part-time or full-time basis, including self-employment
within an integrated setting within the community. The individual must be compensated at
minimum wage or higher, using the higher of the Federal, State, or local rate, and at a rate
comparable to the wage paid to non-disabled workers performing the same tasks, including
receiving the same benefits and opportunities for advancement.

• • Customized Training – is training that:

• a. is designed to meet the specific requirements of an employer (including a group of
employers);
• b. is conducted with a commitment by the employer to employ an individual upon

successful completion of the training; and
• c. for which the employer pays – (i) a significant portion of the cost of training,
as determined by the local board involved, taking into account the size of the
employer and such other factors as the local board determines to be appropriate,
which may include the number of employees participating in training, wage and
benefit levels of those employees (at present and anticipated upon completion of the
training), relation of the training to the competitiveness of a participant, and other
employer-provided training and advancement opportunities; and (ii) in the case of
customized training involving an employer located in multiple local areas in the State,
a significant portion of the cost of the training, as determined by the Governor of the
State, taking into account the size of the employer and such other factors as the
Governor determines to be appropriate.

• • Employment – Describes when an individual is working in a paid, unsubsidized job or, for
participants in titles I, II, or III, working 15 hours or more a week in an unpaid job on a farm

or business operated by a family member or participant. A participant enrolled in the title IV
VR program must be employed in a job that meets the definition of competitive integrated
employment, as defined in 34 CFR § 361.5(c)(9) (including customized employment, self-
employment, telecommuting, or business ownership), or supported employment, as defined
in 34 CFR 361.5(c)(53), in competitive integrated employment that is individualized and
customized, consistent with the unique strengths, abilities, interests, and informed choice of
the individual, and includes ongoing support services for individuals with the most
significant disabilities.

• • Exit – As defined for the purpose of performance calculations, exit is the point after which a
participant who has received services through any program meets the following criteria:

I-1

---
Page 33

• (1) For the adult, dislocated worker, and youth programs authorized under WIOA title I, the
AEFLA program authorized under WIOA title II, and the Employment Service program
authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act, as amended by WIOA title III, exit date is the last
date of service.

• (i) The last day of service cannot be determined until at least 90 days have elapsed since the
participant last received services; services do not include self-service, information-only

services, activities, or follow-up services. This also requires that there are no plans to provide
the participant with future services.

(2)(i) For the VR program authorized under title I of the Rehabilitation Act, as amended by
WIOA title IV:

• (A) The participant’s record of service is closed in accordance with 34 CFR 361.56 because
the participant has achieved an employment outcome; or

• (B) The participant’s service record is closed because the individual has not achieved an
employment outcome or the individual has been determined ineligible after receiving
services in accordance with 34 CFR 361.43.

• (ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a participant will not be considered
as meeting the definition of exit from the VR program if the participant’s service record is
closed because the participant has achieved a supported employment outcome in an

integrated setting but not in competitive integrated employment.

(3)(i) A State may implement a common exit policy for all or some of the core programs in
WIOA title I and the Employment Service program authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act,
as amended by WIOA title III, and any additional required partner program(s) listed in
section 121(b)(1)(B) of WIOA that is under the authority of the Department of Labor (DOL).

• (ii) If a State chooses to implement a common exit policy, the policy must require that a
participant is exited only when all of the criteria in paragraph (c)(1) of this section are met
for the WIOA title I core programs and the Employment Service program authorized under
the Wagner-Peyser Act, as amended by WIOA title III, as well as any additional required
partner programs listed in section 121(b)(1)(B) of WIOA under the authority of the DOL to
which the common exit policy applies in which the participant is enrolled.

• • Incumbent worker – To qualify as an incumbent worker, the individual worker needs to be

employed in a situation that meets the Fair Labor Standards Act requirements for an
employer-employee relationship, and have an established employment history with the
employer for 6 months or more, with the following exception: in the event that the incumbent
worker training is being provided to a cohort of employees, not every employee in the cohort
must have an established employment history with the employer for 6 months or more as
long as a majority of those employees being trained do meet the employment history
requirement. An incumbent worker does not have to meet the eligibility requirements for

I-2

---
Page 34

career and training services for Adults and Dislocated Workers under WIOA, unless they
also are enrolled as a participant in the WIOA Adult or Dislocated Worker program.

• • Integrated Education and Training Program (IET) – a service approach that provides
adult education and literacy activities concurrently and contextually with workforce
preparation activities and workforce training for a specific occupation or occupational cluster
for the purpose of educational and career advancement.

• • Participant – For the WIOA title I Adult, title I Dislocated Worker, title II, and title III
programs, a participant is a reportable individual who has received services other than the
services described in 20 CFR § 677.150(a)(3) (or 34 CFR § 463.150(a)(3), as applicable),
after satisfying all applicable programmatic requirements for the provision of services, such
as eligibility determination.

As set forth in more detail in section 677.150 (or 34 CFR § 463.150, as applicable), the
following individuals are not participants:

• a. Individuals in an AEFLA program who have not completed at least 12 contact hours;
• b. Individuals who only use the self-service system; and
• c. Individuals who receive information-only services or activities, which provide readily
available information that does not require an assessment by a staff member of the
individual’s skills, education, or career objectives.

For the title I Youth program, a participant is a reportable individual who has satisfied all
applicable program requirements for the provision of services, including eligibility
determination, an objective assessment, and development of an individual service strategy,
and received 1 of the 14 WIOA Youth program elements identified in section 129(c)(2) of
WIOA.

For the title IV VR programs, a participant is a reportable individual who has applied and
been determined eligible for VR services, has an approved and signed IPE, and has begun to
receive services under the IPE.

• • Participant Individual Record Layout (PIRL) – the data layout that provides a
standardized set of data elements, definitions, and reporting instructions that will be used to
describe the characteristics, activities, and outcomes of WIOA participants.

• • Period of participation – for all indicators, except Measurable Skill Gains, a period of
participation refers to the period of time beginning when an individual becomes a participant
and ending on the participant’s date of exit from the program.

• • Reportable individual – an individual who has taken action that demonstrates an intent to
use program services and who meets specific reporting criteria of the program, including:

I-3

---
Page 35

1) Individuals who provide identifying information;
2) Individuals who only use the self-service system;
3) Individuals who only receive information-only services or activities; or
4) For the purposes of the title IV VR program only, a student with a disability who
solely receives pre-employment transition services, and who has not applied or been
determined eligible for VR services and who does not have an approved and signed
IPE.

• • Secondary school diploma – a regular high school diploma recognized by a State and that is
included for accountability purposes under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965 (ESEA), as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). (See section
8101(43) of the ESEA.)

• • Unsubsidized employment – employment in the private sector or public sector for which the
employer does not receive a subsidy from public funds to offset all or a part of the wages and
costs of employing an individual.

I-4

---
Page 36

Attachment II
Table A
Exclusions (PIRL Data Element 923)

Attachment II – Table A
Exclusions – Apply To All Participants In
Title I Adult, Title I Dislocated Worker, Title II AEFLA,
Title III Employment Service, and Title IV VR Programs

 The participant exits the program because the participant has become incarcerated in a
correctional institution or has become a resident of an institution or facility providing 24-hour
support such as a hospital or treatment center during the course of receiving services as a
participant.

 The participant exits the program because of medical treatment and that treatment is expected to
last longer than 90 days and precludes entry into unsubsidized employment or continued
participation in the program.

 The participant is deceased.

 The participant exits the program because the participant is a member of the National Guard or
other reserve military unit of the armed forces and is called to active duty for at least 90 days.

 The participant, who was determined to be eligible for program services, is later determined not to

have met the program’s eligibility criteria. This exclusion applies only to the VR program, in which
participant eligibility is routinely revisited during the participation period. For example, in the VR
program, an individual may be presumptively eligible in accordance with program regulations and
later the individual is found to be too severely disabled to benefit from VR services. As another
example, a participant may decide, after receiving some services, to pursue sheltered
employment. Because an individual must pursue an employment outcome, and sheltered
employment does not meet the definition of an employment outcome for purposes of the VR
program, this individual would be determined to be no longer eligible for the VR program. For
titles I, II, and III, program eligibility is determined at the time an individual becomes a participant
and such eligibility is not revisited during the individual’s participation in the program.

II-1

Attachment II – Table A
Exclusions – Apply To All Participants In
Title I Adult, Title I Dislocated Worker, Title II AEFLA,
Title III Employment Service, and Title IV VR Programs
|  The participant exits the program because the participant has become incarcerated in a
correctional institution or has become a resident of an institution or facility providing 24-hour
support such as a hospital or treatment center during the course of receiving services as a
participant.
 The participant exits the program because of medical treatment and that treatment is expected to
last longer than 90 days and precludes entry into unsubsidized employment or continued
participation in the program.
 The participant is deceased.
 The participant exits the program because the participant is a member of the National Guard or
other reserve military unit of the armed forces and is called to active duty for at least 90 days.
 The participant, who was determined to be eligible for program services, is later determined not to
have met the program’s eligibility criteria. This exclusion applies only to the VR program, in which
participant eligibility is routinely revisited during the participation period. For example, in the VR
program, an individual may be presumptively eligible in accordance with program regulations and
later the individual is found to be too severely disabled to benefit from VR services. As another
example, a participant may decide, after receiving some services, to pursue sheltered
employment. Because an individual must pursue an employment outcome, and sheltered
employment does not meet the definition of an employment outcome for purposes of the VR
program, this individual would be determined to be no longer eligible for the VR program. For
titles I, II, and III, program eligibility is determined at the time an individual becomes a participant
and such eligibility is not revisited during the individual’s participation in the program. | | |

---
Page 37

Table B
Exclusions (PIRL Data Element 923)

Attachment II – Table B
Exclusions – Apply to Participants in Title I Youth Program

 The participant exits the program because the participant has become incarcerated in a
correctional institution or has become a resident of an institution or facility providing 24-hour
support such as a hospital or treatment center during the course of receiving services as a
participant.

 The participant exits the program because of medical treatment and that treatment is expected to
last longer than 90 days and precludes entry into unsubsidized employment or continued
participation in the program.

 The participant is deceased.

 The participant exits the program because the participant is a member of the National Guard or

other reserve military unit of the armed forces and is called to active duty for at least 90 days.

 The participant is in the foster care system as defined in 45 CFR 1355.20(a) and exits the program
because the participant has moved from the local workforce area as part of such a program or
system.

Table C
Exclusions: Section 225 of WIOA

Attachment II – Table C
Exclusions – Apply to Participants in Title II AEFLA Program

 A Title II AEFLA participant, who is a criminal offender in a correctional institution, receives services
under section 225 of WIOA. When these participants remain incarcerated after exit from the
program, they are excluded from the calculation of the following WIOA indicators of performance:

• - Employment rate – 2nd quarter after exit;

• - Employment rate – 4th quarter after exit;
• - Median earnings – 2nd quarter after exit; and
• - Credential attainment.

 All section 225 participants are included in the Measurable Skill Gains indicator.

II-2

Attachment II – Table B
Exclusions – Apply to Participants in Title I Youth Program
|  The participant exits the program because the participant has become incarcerated in a
correctional institution or has become a resident of an institution or facility providing 24-hour
support such as a hospital or treatment center during the course of receiving services as a
participant.
 The participant exits the program because of medical treatment and that treatment is expected to
last longer than 90 days and precludes entry into unsubsidized employment or continued
participation in the program.
 The participant is deceased.
 The participant exits the program because the participant is a member of the National Guard or
other reserve military unit of the armed forces and is called to active duty for at least 90 days.
 The participant is in the foster care system as defined in 45 CFR 1355.20(a) and exits the program
because the participant has moved from the local workforce area as part of such a program or
system. | | |

Attachment II – Table C
Exclusions – Apply to Participants in Title II AEFLA Program
|  A Title II AEFLA participant, who is a criminal offender in a correctional institution, receives services
under section 225 of WIOA. When these participants remain incarcerated after exit from the
program, they are excluded from the calculation of the following WIOA indicators of performance:
• Employment rate – 2nd quarter after exit;
• Employment rate – 4th quarter after exit;
• Median earnings – 2nd quarter after exit; and
• Credential attainment.
 All section 225 participants are included in the Measurable Skill Gains indicator. | | |

---
Page 38

Attachment III

Wage Conversion Chart

Note: When using this chart, as described in the joint supplemental wage information
guidance, core programs must ensure that information gathered is representative of the
participant’s regular hours and earnings.18 It is important to note that when collecting
supplemental wage information for the median earnings indicator, programs must only report
those wages that are actually paid to the participant during the quarter, not projected amounts
based on this wage conversion chart.

Attachment III – Wage Conversion Chart
This is a guide to convert various wage and earnings inputs to a quarterly wage as required in PIRL data
elements 1703, 1704, 1705, and 1706.
Directions: Collect the hourly/weekly/bi-weekly/monthly/annual wages from the participant and enter
that value in the appropriate cell. The example input values in red must be replaced with the appropriate
information collected from the participant to calculate the reportable quarterly wage.
Convert Hourly Rate to Quarterly Wages
Hourly hours worked
13 weeks per
Rate per week on average Quarterly Wages
quarter
($xxx.xx/hour) (xx.x)
$7.25 X 32.0 X 13 = $3,016.00
Convert Weekly Wages to Quarterly Wages
Weekly
Wages 13 weeks per quarter Quarterly Wages
($xxxxx.xx)
$290.00 X 13 = $3,770.00
Convert Biweekly Wages to Quarterly Wages
Biweekly
Wages 6.5 biweekly pay periods per quarter Quarterly Wages
($xxxxx.xx)
$580.00 X 6.5 = $3,770.00
Convert Monthly Wages to Quarterly Wages
Monthly
Wages 3 months per quarter Quarterly Wages
($xxxxx.xx)
$1,256.67 X 3 = $3,770.01
Convert Annual Wages to Quarterly Wages
Annual
Wages 4 quarters per year Quarterly Wages
($xxxxxx.xx)
$15,080.00 / 4 = $3,770.00

18 See Guidance on the use of Supplemental Wage Information to implement the Performance Accountability
Requirements under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, joint guidance issues on June 1, 2017 via the
Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education (OCTAE) Program Memorandum 17-6, DOL Employment and
Training Administration Training and Employment Guidance Letter (TEGL) 26-16, and Rehabilitation Services
Administration (RSA) Technical Assistance Circular (TAC) 17-04.
III-1

Attachment III – Wage Conversion Chart
This is a guide to convert various wage and earnings inputs to a quarterly wage as required in PIRL data
elements 1703, 1704, 1705, and 1706.
| Directions: Collect the hourly/weekly/bi-weekly/monthly/annual wages from the participant and enter
that value in the appropriate cell. The example input values in red must be replaced with the appropriate
information collected from the participant to calculate the reportable quarterly wage. | | |
Convert Hourly Rate to Quarterly Wages
| Hourly hours worked
13 weeks per
Rate per week on average Quarterly Wages
quarter
($xxx.xx/hour) (xx.x) | | |
$7.25 X 32.0 X 13 = $3,016.00
Convert Weekly Wages to Quarterly Wages
| Weekly
Wages 13 weeks per quarter Quarterly Wages
($xxxxx.xx) | | |
$290.00 X 13 = $3,770.00
Convert Biweekly Wages to Quarterly Wages
| Biweekly
Wages 6.5 biweekly pay periods per quarter Quarterly Wages
($xxxxx.xx) | | |
$580.00 X 6.5 = $3,770.00
Convert Monthly Wages to Quarterly Wages
| Monthly
Wages 3 months per quarter Quarterly Wages
($xxxxx.xx) | | |
$1,256.67 X 3 = $3,770.01
Convert Annual Wages to Quarterly Wages
| Annual
Wages 4 quarters per year Quarterly Wages
($xxxxxx.xx) | | |
$15,080.00 / 4 = $3,770.00

---
Page 39

Attachment IV
[This Attachment has been removed]

IV

---
Page 40

Attachment V

Periods of Participation – Effects on Indicators of Performance

ATTACHMENT V – PERIODS OF PARTICIPATION – EFFECTS ON INDICATORS OF PERFORMANCE

INDICATOR OF PERFORMANCE EFFECT
2nd and 4th Quarter Employment  States1 must ensure follow up with participants as necessary to report on the WIOA employment
Indicators; rates, median earnings, and effectiveness in serving employers indicators of performance. These data
2nd and 4th Quarter Youth must be reported in the calendar quarters required by each measure according to the exit date of
Indicators; each period of participation.
Median Earnings; and
Effectiveness in Serving For example:
Employers The State must report whether a participant who exits in November was employed in the second
(ending June 30th) and fourth (ending December 31st) quarters following this exit. If this
individual re-enters the program, becomes a participant, and exits in the same program year, the
State must report the same post-exit data elements after the second exit during the same
program year. The State would follow up again with the participant to determine employment in
the second and fourth quarters following the second exit (or to determine
employment/education/training for Youth participants).

 Participants are included in the calculation of median earnings and effectiveness in serving employers

only if they were employed in the second quarter after exit.

Credential Attainment  States must ensure follow-up with participants as necessary to report this outcome for each period of
participation. Reporting on this indicator requires a full year of follow-up to determine if a credential
was attained within one year after exit and to determine employment or entry into postsecondary
education or training for those who attain a secondary school diploma or recognized equivalent.

1 For purposes of the VR program, the term State, in this context, refers to each individual grantee because each VR agency is responsible for collecting and
reporting data regarding its participants.

V

ATTACHMENT V – PERIODS OF PARTICIPATION – EFFECTS ON INDICATORS OF PERFORMANCE

INDICATOR OF PERFORMANCE EFFECT
| 2nd and 4th Quarter Employment
Indicators;
2nd and 4th Quarter Youth
Indicators;
Median Earnings; and
Effectiveness in Serving
Employers | | |  States1 must ensure follow up with participants as necessary to report on the WIOA employment
rates, median earnings, and effectiveness in serving employers indicators of performance. These data
must be reported in the calendar quarters required by each measure according to the exit date of
each period of participation.
For example:
The State must report whether a participant who exits in November was employed in the second
(ending June 30th) and fourth (ending December 31st) quarters following this exit. If this
individual re-enters the program, becomes a participant, and exits in the same program year, the
State must report the same post-exit data elements after the second exit during the same
program year. The State would follow up again with the participant to determine employment in
the second and fourth quarters following the second exit (or to determine
employment/education/training for Youth participants).
 Participants are included in the calculation of median earnings and effectiveness in serving employers
only if they were employed in the second quarter after exit. | | |
| Credential Attainment | | |  States must ensure follow-up with participants as necessary to report this outcome for each period of
participation. Reporting on this indicator requires a full year of follow-up to determine if a credential
was attained within one year after exit and to determine employment or entry into postsecondary
education or training for those who attain a secondary school diploma or recognized equivalent. | | |

---
Page 41

INDICATOR OF PERFORMANCE EFFECT
 States report periods of participation and outcomes, if achieved, for both periods when there is more
than one period of participation in the same program year.

For example:
A participant who exits in November, re-enters, and exits again in May must be provided follow-
up services for 4 quarters after exit for each period of participation (i.e., quarter ending December
31st of the next program year for the first period of participation and the quarter ending June
30th of the next program year for the second period of participation).
Measurable Skill Gains  Indicator is not based on exit and, therefore; a participant with multiple enrollment dates is included
in this indicator for each program entry during a program year.

For example:
If a person has two program entry dates but only exits once within a program year, they are
counted twice for the measurable skill gains indicator, provided they meet the definition and
criteria for measurable skill gains (i.e., enrolled in education or training leading to a recognized
credential or employment during both periods of participation).

V

INDICATOR OF PERFORMANCE EFFECT
| | | |  States report periods of participation and outcomes, if achieved, for both periods when there is more
than one period of participation in the same program year.
For example:
A participant who exits in November, re-enters, and exits again in May must be provided follow-
up services for 4 quarters after exit for each period of participation (i.e., quarter ending December
31st of the next program year for the first period of participation and the quarter ending June
30th of the next program year for the second period of participation). | | |
| Measurable Skill Gains | | |  Indicator is not based on exit and, therefore; a participant with multiple enrollment dates is included
in this indicator for each program entry during a program year.
For example:
If a person has two program entry dates but only exits once within a program year, they are
counted twice for the measurable skill gains indicator, provided they meet the definition and
criteria for measurable skill gains (i.e., enrolled in education or training leading to a recognized
credential or employment during both periods of participation). | | |

---
Page 42

Attachment VI

Examples of Counting Periods of Participation for Exit-Based Indicators of Performance

Counting Periods of Participation: Examples for Exit-Based Indicators of Performance

Example 1

An individual:
1) becomes a participant in August 2021; and
2) exits in September 2022.

In this example, the participant’s enrollment in the program spans across two program years. However, the period of participation falls
during PYs 2021 and 2022. There is only one period of participation.

VI-1

Counting Periods of Participation: Examples for Exit-Based Indicators of Performance
| Example 1
An individual:
1) becomes a participant in August 2021; and
2) exits in September 2022.
In this example, the participant’s enrollment in the program spans across two program years. However, the period of participation falls
during PYs 2021 and 2022. There is only one period of participation. | | |

---
Page 43

Examples of Counting Periods of Participation for Exit-based Indicators of Performance

Counting Periods of Participation: Examples for Exit-Based Indicators of Performance

Example 2
An individual:
1) becomes a participant in September 2021;
2) exits the program in November 2021;
3) re-enrolls and becomes a participant in March 2022; and
4) exits the program again in May 2022.

In this example, the participant has two periods of participation during a single program year. Because both exit dates occurred within
the same program year (July 2021 – June 2022), the participant has two periods of participation for Program Year 2021. Therefore,
exit-based performance indicators should be collected and calculated based off both periods of participation; two separate outcomes
will be based on the November 2021 exit and May 2022 exit, respectively.

VI-2

Counting Periods of Participation: Examples for Exit-Based Indicators of Performance
| Example 2
An individual:
1) becomes a participant in September 2021;
2) exits the program in November 2021;
3) re-enrolls and becomes a participant in March 2022; and
4) exits the program again in May 2022.
In this example, the participant has two periods of participation during a single program year. Because both exit dates occurred within
the same program year (July 2021 – June 2022), the participant has two periods of participation for Program Year 2021. Therefore,
exit-based performance indicators should be collected and calculated based off both periods of participation; two separate outcomes
will be based on the November 2021 exit and May 2022 exit, respectively. | | |

---
Page 44

Example of Counting Periods of Participation for Exit-based Indicators of Performance

Counting Periods of Participation: Example for Exit-Based Indicators and the Measurable Skill Gains Indicator of Performance

Example 3 - REVISED
An individual:
1) becomes a participant in August 2021; and
2) exits the program in November 2022.

In this example, the participant has one period of participation which spans two program years (Program Year 2021 and Program Year
2022) and will be reported once for the purpose of exit-based indicators. Also, in this example, the participant must be reported twice
(once in Program Year 2021 and once in Program Year 2022) for the measurable skill gains indicator because this indicator of performance

must be reported at least once per program year for each participant and because the reporting is not triggered by exit. The individual is
counted as a participant in both Program Year 2021 and Program Year 2022 because they continued to receive services after July 1, 2022.
Exit-based performance indicators should be collected and calculated based on the November 2022 exit date.

VI-3

Counting Periods of Participation: Example for Exit-Based Indicators and the Measurable Skill Gains Indicator of Performance
| Example 3 - REVISED
An individual:
1) becomes a participant in August 2021; and
2) exits the program in November 2022.
In this example, the participant has one period of participation which spans two program years (Program Year 2021 and Program Year
2022) and will be reported once for the purpose of exit-based indicators. Also, in this example, the participant must be reported twice
(once in Program Year 2021 and once in Program Year 2022) for the measurable skill gains indicator because this indicator of performance
must be reported at least once per program year for each participant and because the reporting is not triggered by exit. The individual is
counted as a participant in both Program Year 2021 and Program Year 2022 because they continued to receive services after July 1, 2022.
Exit-based performance indicators should be collected and calculated based on the November 2022 exit date. | | |

---
Page 45

Attachment VII
Table A
Participation Level Services Chart
WIOA Title I Adult, Title I Dislocated Worker, and
Title III Employment Service Programs20

Attachment VII – Table A
Category
Does this
Adult/DW/ES of Service Applicable PIRL
service trigger
Service Type (e.g., Basic, Data Element
inclusion as a
(WIOA sections 134(c)) Individualized, Number(s)
participant?
Training, etc.)
Basic Career
Eligibility Determination No 1000, 1002, 1007
Service
Basic Career
Outreach, Intake, Orientation No 1000, 1002, 1007
Service
Providing info on in-demand sectors, occupations, Basic Career
No 1000, 1002, 1103
or nontraditional employment Service
Provision of workforce and labor market Basic Career
No 1000, 1002, 1103
employment statistics information Service
Basic Career
Provision of info on job vacancies No 1000, 1002, 1103
Service
Provision of info on job skills necessary to fill Basic Career
No 1000, 1002, 1103
vacancies Service
Provision of info on local demand occupations,
Basic Career
with earnings, skill requirements, and No 1000, 1002, 1103
Service
opportunities for advancement for those jobs
Provision of performance and program cost info Basic Career
No 1000, 1002, 1100
for providers of education and training Service
Basic Career
Provision of info on local performance No 1000, 1002, 1100
Service
Provision of info on availability of supportive Basic Career
No 1000, 1002, 1100
services or assistance Service
Job search assistance Basic Career
No 1000, 1002, 1101
(Self-directed) Service
Job search assistance Basic Career 1001, 1003, 1004,
Yes
(Staff-assisted) Service 1104
Initial assessment of skill level & other service Basic Career 1001, 1003, 1004,
Yes
needs Service 1102
1001, 1003, 1004,
Placement assistance (includes “Referred to
Basic Career 1105, 1106, 1107,
Employment”) Yes
Service 1108, 1109, 1110,
(Staff-assisted)
1111
20 Note that this chart does not include all available services that may be provided, but rather those services
specifically authorized under WIOA sec. 134(c)(2). Note that while services like supportive services or follow up
services do not trigger participation, these services can only be provided to someone who has already received a
participant-level service (see the Supportive Service Desk Reference on WorkforceGPS for more details).
VII-1

Attachment VII – Table A
| Adult/DW/ES
Service Type
(WIOA sections 134(c)) | | Does this
service trigger
inclusion as a
participant? | | Category | | Applicable PIRL
Data Element
Number(s) | |
of Service
(e.g., Basic,
Individualized,
Training, etc.)
| Eligibility Determination | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1007 | |
| Outreach, Intake, Orientation | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1007 | |
| Providing info on in-demand sectors, occupations,
or nontraditional employment | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1103 | |
| Provision of workforce and labor market
employment statistics information | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1103 | |
| Provision of info on job vacancies | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1103 | |
| Provision of info on job skills necessary to fill
vacancies | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1103 | |
| Provision of info on local demand occupations,
with earnings, skill requirements, and
opportunities for advancement for those jobs | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1103 | |
| Provision of performance and program cost info
for providers of education and training | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1100 | |
| Provision of info on local performance | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1100 | |
| Provision of info on availability of supportive
services or assistance | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1100 | |
| Job search assistance
(Self-directed) | | No | Basic Career
Service | | | 1000, 1002, 1101 | |
| Job search assistance
(Staff-assisted) | | Yes | Basic Career
Service | | | 1001, 1003, 1004,
1104 | |
| Initial assessment of skill level & other service
needs | | Yes | Basic Career
Service | | | 1001, 1003, 1004,
1102 | |
| Placement assistance (includes “Referred to
Employment”)
(Staff-assisted) | | Yes | Basic Career
Service | | | 1001, 1003, 1004,
1105, 1106, 1107,
1108, 1109, 1110,
1111 | |

Does this
service trigger
inclusion as a
participant?

Adult/DW/ES
Service Type
(WIOA sections 134(c))

Applicable PIRL
Data Element
Number(s)

---
Page 46

Attachment VII – Table A
Category
Does this
Adult/DW/ES of Service Applicable PIRL
service trigger
Service Type (e.g., Basic, Data Element
inclusion as a
(WIOA sections 134(c)) Individualized, Number(s)
participant?
Training, etc.)
Career Counseling (includes “Staff-assisted career Basic Career 1001, 1003, 1004,
Yes
guidance”) Service 1102
Provision of referrals and associated coordination Basic Career 1001, 1003, 1004,
Yes
of activities with other programs and services Service 1113, 1115
Basic Career 1001, 1003, 1004,
Referral to supportive services Yes
Service 1113, 1115
Provision of information and meaningful Basic Career 1001, 1003, 1004,
Yes
assistance filing for UI Service 1112
Basic Career 1001, 1003, 1004,
Assistance establishing eligibility for financial aid Yes
Service 1116
Comprehensive and specialized assessments Individualized
Yes 1004, 1200, 1201
Career Service
Development of IEP Individualized 1004, 1200,
Yes
Career Service 1201, 1202
Group Counseling Individualized
Yes 1004, 1200, 1201
Career Service
Individual Counseling Individualized
Yes 1004, 1200, 1201
Career Service
Career Planning Individualized
Yes 1004, 1200, 1201
Career Service
Short-term prevocational services Individualized 1004, 1200,
Yes
Career Service 1201, 1210
Internships and work experiences (including Individualized 1004, 1200, 1201,
Yes
transitional jobs) Career Service 1203, 1205, 1211
Workforce preparation activities Individualized
Yes 1004, 1200, 1201
Career Service
Financial literacy services Individualized 1004, 1200,
Yes
Career Service 1201, 1206
Out-of-area job search assistance and relocation Individualized
Yes 1004, 1200, 1201
assistance Career Service
English-language acquisition and integrated Individualized 1004, 1200,
Yes
education and training programs Career Service 1201, 1207
1300, 1301, 1302,
1303, 1304, 1305,
Training services under WIOA section 1306, 1307, 1308,
134(c)(3)(D) with exception of section Yes Training 1309, 1310, 1311,
134(c)(3)(D)(iii) (incumbent worker training) 1312, 1313, 1314,
1315, 1316, 1317,
1318, 1319
VII-2

Attachment VII – Table A
| Adult/DW/ES
Service Type
(WIOA sections 134(c)) | | Does this
service trigger
inclusion as a
participant? | | Category | | Applicable PIRL
Data Element
Number(s) | |
of Service
(e.g., Basic,
Individualized,
Training, etc.)
| Career Counseling (includes “Staff-assisted career
guidance”) | | Yes | Basic Career
Service | | | 1001, 1003, 1004,
1102 | |
| Provision of referrals and associated coordination
of activities with other programs and services | | Yes | Basic Career
Service | | | 1001, 1003, 1004,
1113, 1115 | |
| Referral to supportive services | | Yes | Basic Career
Service | | | 1001, 1003, 1004,
1113, 1115 | |
| Provision of information and meaningful
assistance filing for UI | | Yes | Basic Career
Service | | | 1001, 1003, 1004,
1112 | |
| Assistance establishing eligibility for financial aid | | Yes | Basic Career
Service | | | 1001, 1003, 1004,
1116 | |
| Comprehensive and specialized assessments | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200, 1201 | |
| Development of IEP | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200,
1201, 1202 | |
| Group Counseling | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200, 1201 | |
| Individual Counseling | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200, 1201 | |
| Career Planning | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200, 1201 | |
| Short-term prevocational services | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200,
1201, 1210 | |
| Internships and work experiences (including
transitional jobs) | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200, 1201,
1203, 1205, 1211 | |
| Workforce preparation activities | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200, 1201 | |
| Financial literacy services | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200,
1201, 1206 | |
| Out-of-area job search assistance and relocation
assistance | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200, 1201 | |
| English-language acquisition and integrated
education and training programs | | Yes | Individualized
Career Service | | | 1004, 1200,
1201, 1207 | |
| Training services under WIOA section
134(c)(3)(D) with exception of section
134(c)(3)(D)(iii) (incumbent worker training) | | Yes | Training | | | 1300, 1301, 1302,
1303, 1304, 1305,
1306, 1307, 1308,
1309, 1310, 1311,
1312, 1313, 1314,
1315, 1316, 1317,
1318, 1319 | |

Does this
service trigger
inclusion as a
participant?

Adult/DW/ES
Service Type
(WIOA sections 134(c))

Applicable PIRL
Data Element
Number(s)

---
Page 47

Attachment VII – Table A
Category
Does this
Adult/DW/ES of Service Applicable PIRL
service trigger
Service Type (e.g., Basic, Data Element
inclusion as a
(WIOA sections 134(c)) Individualized, Number(s)
participant?
Training, etc.)
n/a (must be a
Supportive Services authorized in WIOA section Supportive
participant first 1409
134(d)(2) and defined in 20 CFR 680.900 Services
to receive)
n/a (must be a
Follow up
Follow up services participant first 1503
service
to receive)
n/a. Only
reported in
PIRL if
Rapid Response Services Rapid Response 908, 909
individual
becomes a
participant.
Incumbent Worker Training No21 Training 907
*Note: Receipt of any of the three types of services (Basic, Individualized, or Training) makes an
individual a “Reportable Individual” while it only takes the receipt of one service that triggers
participation to be considered a participant.22 However, in Quarterly Performance Reports only those
Reportable Individuals that are not participants are displayed in the Reportable Individual counts.

21 Although Incumbent Worker Training is not a self-service or information-only service, individuals are not
required to meet eligibility requirements for the Adult or Dislocated Worker programs to receive Incumbent Worker
Training.
22 For more information on distinguishing between Reportable Individual and Participant-level services for these
programs, see Understanding Reportable Individuals and Participants for Performance: A Guide to Reporting
Services, https://ion.workforcegps.org/resources/2017/02/22/07/41/Understanding-Reportable-Individuals-and-
Participants-for-Performance-A-Guide-to-Reporting-Services.

VII-3

Attachment VII – Table A
| Adult/DW/ES
Service Type
(WIOA sections 134(c)) | | Does this
service trigger
inclusion as a
participant? | | Category | | Applicable PIRL
Data Element
Number(s) | |
of Service
(e.g., Basic,
Individualized,
Training, etc.)
| Supportive Services authorized in WIOA section
134(d)(2) and defined in 20 CFR 680.900 | | n/a (must be a
participant first
to receive) | Supportive
Services | | | 1409 | |
| Follow up services | | n/a (must be a
participant first
to receive) | Follow up
service | | | 1503 | |
| Rapid Response Services | | n/a. Only
reported in
PIRL if
individual
becomes a
participant. | Rapid Response | | | 908, 909 | |
Incumbent Worker Training No21 Training 907

Does this
service trigger
inclusion as a
participant?

Adult/DW/ES
Service Type
(WIOA sections 134(c))

Applicable PIRL
Data Element
Number(s)

---
Page 48

Table B
Participation Level Services Chart
WIOA Title I Youth Program

Attachment VII – Table B
Does this service
Youth Service Type Section trigger inclusion Category of Applicable PIRL Data
129(c)(2) as a Service24 Element Number(s)
participant?23
Tutoring, study skills training,
Yes Career Service 1402
dropout prevention
Alternative secondary school
Yes Career Service 1403
services
Paid and unpaid work
Yes Career Service 1205, 1405
experience
1300, 1302, 1303, 1306,
1307, 1308, 1309, 1310,
Occupational skills training Yes Training 1311, 1312, 1313, 1314,
1315, 1316, 1317, 1318,
1319
Education offered
concurrently with workforce Yes Career Service 1407
preparation
Leadership development Yes Career Service 1408
Supportive Services Yes Career Service 1409
Adult mentoring Yes Career Service 1410
Follow-up services No Career Service 1412
Comprehensive guidance and
Yes Career Service 1411
counseling
Financial literacy education Yes Career Service 1206
Entrepreneurial skills training Yes Career Service 1413
Services that provide labor
Yes Career Service 1414
market information
Postsecondary preparation and
Yes Career Service 1415
transition activities

23 All Youth program elements, except follow-up services, trigger participation following eligibility determination,
objective assessment, and completion of the individual service strategy.
24 Note that the categorization of career services and training services for the title I Youth program differs from the
title I Adult and Dislocated Worker programs.

VII-4

Attachment VII – Table B
| Youth Service Type Section
129(c)(2) | | | Does this service | | Category of
Service24 | Applicable PIRL Data
Element Number(s) | |
trigger inclusion
as a
participant?23
| Tutoring, study skills training,
dropout prevention | | Yes | | | Career Service | 1402 | |
| Alternative secondary school
services | | Yes | | | Career Service | 1403 | |
| Paid and unpaid work
experience | | Yes | | | Career Service | 1205, 1405 | |
| Occupational skills training | | Yes | | | Training | 1300, 1302, 1303, 1306,
1307, 1308, 1309, 1310,
1311, 1312, 1313, 1314,
1315, 1316, 1317, 1318,
1319 | |
| Education offered
concurrently with workforce
preparation | | Yes | | | Career Service | 1407 | |
Leadership development Yes Career Service 1408
Supportive Services Yes Career Service 1409
Adult mentoring Yes Career Service 1410
Follow-up services No Career Service 1412
| Comprehensive guidance and
counseling | | Yes | | | Career Service | 1411 | |
Financial literacy education Yes Career Service 1206
Entrepreneurial skills training Yes Career Service 1413
| Services that provide labor
market information | | Yes | | | Career Service | 1414 | |
| Postsecondary preparation and
transition activities | | Yes | | | Career Service | 1415 | |

Youth Service Type Section
129(c)(2)

Category of
Service24

Applicable PIRL Data
Element Number(s)

---
Page 49

Table C
Applicable Career and Training Services for
WIOA Title II AEFLA Program

Attachment VII – Table C
Career and Training Services Applicable to AEFLA25 Category of Service
Outreach, intake, and orientation information Career Service
Initial assessment of skill levels including literacy, numeracy, Career Service
and English language proficiency, as well as aptitudes,
abilities, and supportive services needs
Referrals to and coordination of activities with other programs Career Service
and services
Provision of performance information and program cost Career Service
information on eligible providers of education, training, and
workforce services by program and type of provider
Provision of information on availability of supportive services Career Service
or assistance and appropriate referrals (including childcare;
child support; medical or child health assistance available
through the State’s Medicaid program and CHIP; SNAP
benefits; EITC; assistance under TANF, and other supportive
services and transportation)
Integrated education and training (IET) programs26 Training Service

25 Sections 678.430(b)(8) and 678.430(b)(11) of the WIOA Joint Rule identify workforce preparation activities and
English language acquisition programs as applicable career services authorized to be provided through the one-stop
delivery system by required one-stop partners. However, these are also services specifically authorized by AEFLA
and provided by eligible providers as instructional or program services. Because of this, the program services and
career services costs do not lend themselves to differentiation. Therefore, on the WIOA Statewide and Local
Performance Report Template, workforce preparation activities and English language acquisition programs are not
included in the career services costs calculation.
26 If a program is using title II AEFLA funds to provide an IET program, the training component would be
categorized as a training service and should be included in the cost calculation of Training Services on the WIOA
Statewide and Local Performance Report Template.
VII-5

Attachment VII – Table C
Career and Training Services Applicable to AEFLA25 Category of Service
Outreach, intake, and orientation information Career Service
| Initial assessment of skill levels including literacy, numeracy,
and English language proficiency, as well as aptitudes,
abilities, and supportive services needs | | | Career Service | | |
| Referrals to and coordination of activities with other programs
and services | | | Career Service | | |
| Provision of performance information and program cost
information on eligible providers of education, training, and
workforce services by program and type of provider | | | Career Service | | |
| Provision of information on availability of supportive services
or assistance and appropriate referrals (including childcare;
child support; medical or child health assistance available
through the State’s Medicaid program and CHIP; SNAP
benefits; EITC; assistance under TANF, and other supportive
services and transportation) | | | Career Service | | |
Integrated education and training (IET) programs26 Training Service

---
Page 50

Table D
Participation Level Services Chart
WIOA Title IV VR Program

Attachment VII – Table D
RSA-911
Vocational Rehabilitation Service Category of Service Data Element
Number(s)
Pre-Employment Transition Services: Job
Career Service 97 - 102
Exploration Counseling
Pre-Employment Transition Services: Work
Training Service 103 - 108
Based Learning Experiences
Pre-Employment Transition Services: Counseling
Career Service 109 - 114
on Enrollment Opportunities
Pre-Employment Transition Services: Workplace
Career Service 115 - 120
Readiness Training
Pre-Employment Transition Services: Instruction
Career Service 121 - 126
in Self Advocacy
Graduate College or University Training Service 129 - 135
Four-Year College or University Training Training Service 136 - 142
Junior or Community College Training Training Service 143 - 149
Occupational or Vocational Training Training Service 150 - 156
On the Job Training Training Service 157 - 163
Registered Apprenticeship Training Training Service 164 – 169
Basic Academic Remedial or Literacy Training Training Service 170 – 176
Job Readiness Training Training Service 177 – 183
Disability Related Skills Training Training Service 184 – 190
Miscellaneous Training Training Service 191 – 197
Randolph-Sheppard Entrepreneurial Training Training Service 198 – 204
Customized Training Training Service 205 – 211
Assessment Career Service 212 – 218
Diagnosis and Treatment of Impairment Career Service 219 – 225
Vocational Rehabilitation Counseling and
Career Service 226 – 232
Guidance
Job Search Assistance Career Service 233 – 239
Job Placement Assistance Career Service 240 – 246
Short Term Job Supports Career Service 247 – 253
Supported Employment Services Career Service 254 – 260
Information and Referral Services Career Service 261 – 267
Benefits Counseling Career Service 268 – 274
Customized Employment Services Career Service 275 – 281
Extended Services Career Service 282 – 286
Work Based Learning Experience Training Service 402 – 407

VII-6

Attachment VII – Table D
Vocational Rehabilitation Service Category of Service RSA-911
Data Element
Number(s)
| Pre-Employment Transition Services: Job
Exploration Counseling | | Career Service | 97 - 102 | | |
| Pre-Employment Transition Services: Work
Based Learning Experiences | | Training Service | 103 - 108 | | |
| Pre-Employment Transition Services: Counseling
on Enrollment Opportunities | | Career Service | 109 - 114 | | |
| Pre-Employment Transition Services: Workplace
Readiness Training | | Career Service | 115 - 120 | | |
| Pre-Employment Transition Services: Instruction
in Self Advocacy | | Career Service | 121 - 126 | | |
Graduate College or University Training Service 129 - 135
Four-Year College or University Training Training Service 136 - 142
Junior or Community College Training Training Service 143 - 149
Occupational or Vocational Training Training Service 150 - 156
On the Job Training Training Service 157 - 163
Registered Apprenticeship Training Training Service 164 – 169
Basic Academic Remedial or Literacy Training Training Service 170 – 176
Job Readiness Training Training Service 177 – 183
Disability Related Skills Training Training Service 184 – 190
Miscellaneous Training Training Service 191 – 197
Randolph-Sheppard Entrepreneurial Training Training Service 198 – 204
Customized Training Training Service 205 – 211
Assessment Career Service 212 – 218
Diagnosis and Treatment of Impairment Career Service 219 – 225
| Vocational Rehabilitation Counseling and
Guidance | | Career Service | 226 – 232 | | |
Job Search Assistance Career Service 233 – 239
Job Placement Assistance Career Service 240 – 246
Short Term Job Supports Career Service 247 – 253
Supported Employment Services Career Service 254 – 260
Information and Referral Services Career Service 261 – 267
Benefits Counseling Career Service 268 – 274
Customized Employment Services Career Service 275 – 281
Extended Services Career Service 282 – 286
Work Based Learning Experience Training Service 402 – 407

---
Page 51

Attachment VIII

Incumbent Worker Training Required Data Elements

REQUIRED DATA ELEMENTS – INCUMBENT WORKER TRAINING
Primary Collection
Element # Element Name
Method
100 Unique Individual Identifier Local/State
101 State Code of Residence Local/State
108 - A ETA-Assigned 1st Local Workforce Board Code Local/State
403 Occupational Code of Most Recent Employment Prior to Participation (if available) Employer
404 Industry Code of Employment 1st Quarter Prior to Participation Employer
907 Recipient of Incumbent Worker Training Local/State
908 Rapid Response (if applicable) Local/State
1007 Date of Most Recent Reportable Individual Contact Local/State
1308 Date Completed, or Withdrew from, Training #1 Local/State
1313 Date Completed, or Withdrew from, Training #2 Local/State

1318 Date Completed, or Withdrew from, Training #3 Local/State
Most Recent Date Received Rapid Response Services (if applicable)
1501 Local/State
Required for IW only if IWT funded with RR funds (WIOA section 134(a)(2)(A))
1600 Employed in 1st Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1601 Type of Employment Match 1st Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1602 Employed in 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1603 Type of Employment Match 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1604 Employed in 3rd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1605 Type of Employment Match 3rd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1606 Employed in 4th Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1607 Type of Employment Match 4th Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1618 Retention with the same employer in the 2nd Quarter and the 4th Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI wage records
1703 Wages 1st Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1704 Wages 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1705 Wages 3rd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1706 Wages 4th Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records

1800 Type of Recognized Credential (WIOA) Employer follow-up
1801 Date Attained Recognized Credential (WIOA) Employer follow-up
1806 Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Educational Achievement (WIOA) Employer follow-up
Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Secondary Transcript/Report Card
1807 Employer follow-up
(WIOA)
Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Post-Secondary Transcript/Report
1808 Employer follow-up
Card (WIOA)
1809 Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Training Milestone (WIOA) Employer follow-up
1810 Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Skills Progression (WIOA) Employer follow-up
Date Enrolled in Education or Training Program Leading to a Recognized
1811 Employer follow-up
Postsecondary Credential or Employment During the Program (WIOA)
VIII-1

REQUIRED DATA ELEMENTS – INCUMBENT WORKER TRAINING
Element # Element Name Primary Collection
Method
100 Unique Individual Identifier Local/State
101 State Code of Residence Local/State
108 - A ETA-Assigned 1st Local Workforce Board Code Local/State
403 Occupational Code of Most Recent Employment Prior to Participation (if available) Employer
404 Industry Code of Employment 1st Quarter Prior to Participation Employer
907 Recipient of Incumbent Worker Training Local/State
908 Rapid Response (if applicable) Local/State
1007 Date of Most Recent Reportable Individual Contact Local/State
1308 Date Completed, or Withdrew from, Training #1 Local/State
1313 Date Completed, or Withdrew from, Training #2 Local/State
1318 Date Completed, or Withdrew from, Training #3 Local/State
1501 Most Recent Date Received Rapid Response Services (if applicable) Local/State
Required for IW only if IWT funded with RR funds (WIOA section 134(a)(2)(A))
1600 Employed in 1st Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1601 Type of Employment Match 1st Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1602 Employed in 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1603 Type of Employment Match 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1604 Employed in 3rd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1605 Type of Employment Match 3rd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1606 Employed in 4th Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1607 Type of Employment Match 4th Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1618 Retention with the same employer in the 2nd Quarter and the 4th Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI wage records
1703 Wages 1st Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1704 Wages 2nd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1705 Wages 3rd Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1706 Wages 4th Quarter After Exit Quarter (WIOA) If SSN – UI Wage records
1800 Type of Recognized Credential (WIOA) Employer follow-up
1801 Date Attained Recognized Credential (WIOA) Employer follow-up
1806 Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Educational Achievement (WIOA) Employer follow-up
1807 Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Secondary Transcript/Report Card Employer follow-up
(WIOA)
1808 Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Post-Secondary Transcript/Report Employer follow-up
Card (WIOA)
1809 Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Training Milestone (WIOA) Employer follow-up
1810 Date of Most Recent Measurable Skill Gains: Skills Progression (WIOA) Employer follow-up
1811 Date Enrolled in Education or Training Program Leading to a Recognized Employer follow-up
Postsecondary Credential or Employment During the Program (WIOA)

---
Page 52

REQUIRED DATA ELEMENTS – INCUMBENT WORKER TRAINING
Primary Collection
Element # Element Name
Method
Date Completed During Program Participant in an Education or Training Program
1813 Employer follow-up
Leading to a Recognized Credential or Employment

VIII-2

REQUIRED DATA ELEMENTS – INCUMBENT WORKER TRAINING
Element # Element Name Primary Collection
Method
| 1813 | | Date Completed During Program Participant in an Education or Training Program
Leading to a Recognized Credential or Employment | Employer follow-up | | |

Date Completed During Program Participant in an Education or Training Program
Leading to a Recognized Credential or Employment

---
Page 53

Attachment IX

Reporting on Reportable Individuals – Technical Details

A period of reportable individual activity refers to the period of time that begins either (a) when
a person first takes part in a qualifying reportable individual activity or (b) 91 days after the date
of exit of a preceding period of participation. A period of reportable individual activity ends
when either (a) no services have been received for more than 90 days or (b) 90 days prior to the
start of a subsequent period of participation. A new period of reportable individual activity must
be recorded when more than 90 consecutive days have elapsed since that reportable individual
last engaged with the program via self-service or an information-only service or activity. This
“end of the period of reportable individual activity” is needed in order to prevent reportable
individuals who have stopped receiving services from staying in the system indefinitely.

In cases where a person has a period of reportable individual activity lasting more than 90 days,
prior to becoming a participant, two records must be reported. The first record represents the
period of reportable individual activity and must end 91 days before the date of program entry
for the subsequent period of participation. The second record represents the period of
participation and will include any reportable individual services or activities occurring within 90
days prior to the date or program entry.

In cases where a person has a period of reportable individual activity lasting fewer than 90 days,
prior to becoming a participant, only one record must be reported. The record represents a period
of participation and will include any reportable individual services or activities occurring within
90 days prior to the date or program entry.

The same logic applies to periods of reportable individual activity occurring after a period of
participation. Any reportable individual activities occurring within 90 days after the date of
program exit will be reported as part of the period of participation. Reportable individual

activities occurring more than 90 days after the date of program exit will not be included in the
record for the period of participation. A second record representing a period of reportable
individual activity beginning more than 90 days after the date of program exit must be reported.

IX-1