TAC-17-04

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON, DC 20202-2800

TECHNIAL ASSISTANCE CIRCULAR
RSA-TAC-17-04

DATE: July 10, 2025

ADRESSEES: STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AGENCIES
STATE REHABILITATION COUNCILS
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTERS
AMERICAN INDIAN VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION SERVICE
PROJECTS
CLIENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS

SUBJECT: Guidance on the Use of Supplemental Wage Information to Implement the
Performance Accountability Requirements under the Workforce Innovation
and Opportunity Act (WIOA)

PURPOSE:

This guidance updates TAC-17-04, issued June 1, 2017, and developed jointly by the U.S.
Departments of Labor (DOL) and Education (ED) (collectively, the Departments). Within ED,

the Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education (OCTAE) will update Program
Memorandum (PM) 17-6. Within DOL, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA)
will update Training and Employment Guidance Letter (TEGL) 26-16 to be consistent with the
changes reflected herein.

With this issuance, the Departments update the guidance to align it with changes made by the
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Effectiveness in Serving Employers Performance
Indicator final rule (89 FR 13814 (Feb. 23, 2024)) (Final Rule), which took effect March 25,
This Final Rule defined the Effectiveness in Serving Employers primary indicator of
performance, as required by WIOA section 116(b)(2), as Retention with the Same Employer, and
it requires States to report the indicator as a shared indicator across the six core programs. This
guidance also incorporates other changes to improve clarity.

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE:

Background

This TAC rescinds and replaces TAC-17-04, issued June 1, 2017. These changes update the
portions of the guidance that relate to Effectiveness in Serving Employers to align with the Final
Rule. This revision updates the guidance to incorporate the regulatory definition of Effectiveness
in Serving Employers and makes other clarifications.

1

---
Page 2

Section 116 of WIOA establishes performance accountability indicators and performance
reporting requirements to assess the effectiveness of States and local areas in achieving positive
outcomes for participants served by each of the six core WIOA programs.

On August 19, 2016, the Departments published in the Federal Register the WIOA Joint Rule for
Unified and Combined State Plans, Performance Accountability, and the One-Stop System Joint
Provisions (Joint WIOA Final Rule) at 81 FR 55791, which took effect on October 18, 2016. On
June 11, 2024, the Departments revised the Performance Accountability Guidance for Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) Title I, Title II, Title III and Title IV Core Programs,
(originally released December 19, 2016),1 which further clarifies the requirements of the
performance accountability system and assists States in understanding the methodologies for
calculating levels of performance for the six primary indicators of performance, the operational

parameters for each of the indicators, and the application of each of the indicators to each core
program.2

This guidance provides clarification to States on the use of supplemental wage information
(described in detail on page 6 in the section titled “Supplemental Wage Information Methods and
Procedures”), when reliance on such information is necessary for verifying and reporting on the
employment-related performance indicators: employment rate during the second quarter after
exit from the program; employment rate during the fourth quarter after exit from the program;
median earnings during the second quarter after exit from the program; and effectiveness in
serving employers.3 The guidance also applies to the employment-related portion of the
credential attainment indicator.4

1 The core programs are: the Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth programs authorized under WIOA title I and
administered by the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL); the Adult Education and Family Literacy Act (AEFLA)
program authorized under WIOA title II and administered by the U.S. Department of Education (ED); the
Employment Service (ES) program authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act, as amended by WIOA title III and
administered by DOL; and the Vocational Rehabilitation (VR) program authorized under title I of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973, as amended by WIOA title IV and administered by ED.
2 See Performance Accountability Guidance for Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) Title I, Title II,
Title III and Title IV Core Programs, joint guidance issued on December 19, 2016, June 11, 2024 via the Office of
Career, Technical, and Adult Education (OCTAE) Program Memorandum 17-2, DOL Employment and Training
Administration Training and Employment Guidance Letter (TEGL) 10-16, Change 3, and Rehabilitation Services
Administration (RSA) Technical Assistance Circular (TAC) 17-01.
3 Further details on the methodology and operational parameters for each of the employment-related indicators may
be found in OCTAE Program Memorandum 17-2; DOL TEGL 10-16, Change 3; and RSA TAC 17-1.
4 20 CFR 677.155 (a)(1)(iv)(B), 34 CFR 463.155(a)(1)(iv)(B), and 34 CFR 361.155(a)(1)(iv)(B). See also OCTAE
Program Memorandum 17-2; DOL TEGL 10-16; and RSA TAC 17-1. As noted in the section below titled “Primary
Indicators of Performance,” a participant who obtains a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent must
meet an additional condition before they are counted as a successful outcome and included in the numerator of the
credential attainment indicator. The participant is included in the calculation “…only if the participant is also
employed or is enrolled in an education or training program leading to a recognized postsecondary credential within
one year after exit from the program.” Therefore, for the credential attainment indicator, States may elect to use
supplemental wage information to collect information on employment within one year after exit.
2

---
Page 3

Primary Indicators of Performance

Under section 116(b)(2)(A) of WIOA, the performance accountability indicators that apply
across the six core programs are:

Employment Rate – Second Quarter After Exit: The percentage of participants who are in
unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program (for title
I Youth, the indicator is the percentage of participants in education or training activities,
or in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit).

Employment Rate – Fourth Quarter After Exit: The percentage of participants who are in
unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit from the program (for title I
Youth, the indicator is the percentage of participants in education or training activities, or

in unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit).

Median Earnings – Second Quarter After Exit: The median earnings of participants who
are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program.

Credential Attainment: The percentage of those participants enrolled in an education or
training program (excluding those in on-the-job training and customized training) who
attain a recognized postsecondary credential or a secondary school diploma, or its
recognized equivalent, during participation in or within one year after exit from the
program. A participant who has attained a secondary school diploma or its recognized
equivalent is included in the percentage of participants who have attained a secondary
school diploma or its recognized equivalent only if the participant is also employed or is
enrolled in an education or training program leading to a recognized postsecondary
credential within one year after exit from the program.

Measurable Skill Gains: The percentage of program participants who, during a program
year, are in an education or training program that leads to a recognized postsecondary
credential or employment and who are achieving measurable skill gains, defined as
documented academic, technical, occupational, or other forms of progress, towards such
a credential or employment.

Effectiveness in Serving Employers: The percentage of participants in unsubsidized
employment during the second quarter after exit from the program who were employed
by the same employer in the second and fourth quarters after exit. For the six core
programs, this indicator is a statewide indicator reported by one core program on behalf
of all six core programs in the State, as described in the Departments’ joint performance
guidance.5

5 OCTAE Program Memorandum 17-2; DOL TEGL 10-16, Change 3; and RSA TAC 17-01.

3

---
Page 4

Availability of Social Security Numbers (SSNs) and Wage Records to Collect Employment
Information.

Section 116(i)(2) of WIOA requires States to use quarterly wage records, consistent with State
law, to measure their progress on satisfying State and local performance accountability
indicators. The Joint WIOA Final Rule implements these requirements in 20 CFR 677.175, 34
CFR 463.175, and 34 CFR 361.175 by requiring States to use, consistent with State law,
quarterly wage record information such as intrastate and interstate wages paid to an individual,
an individual’s SSN, and the Federal Employer Identification Number (FEIN) of the employer
paying the wages to the individual.

However, the Departments recognize that in particular circumstances (further described below)
there are challenges the core programs face in tracking the progress of individuals for whom

obtaining a quarterly wage record match may not be possible. In order to ensure that programs
may track the participants for performance accountability, the Joint WIOA Final Rule permits
States to use “other information as is necessary to measure the progress of those participants
through methods other than quarterly wage record information” if quarterly wage records are not
available for a participant (20 CFR 677.175(a)(3), 34 CFR 463.175(a)(3), and 34 CFR
361.175(a)(3)).

Matching a participant’s SSN against quarterly wage record information is the most effective
means for determining employment status and earnings for a program participant. However, a
quarterly wage record match will not be possible in all circumstances. Eligibility to participate in
any of the programs under WIOA is not contingent upon the individual providing an SSN.6
More broadly, since the performance indicators require reporting on all participants,7 the
Departments encourage States to develop a method for quantifying the performance outcomes of
participants who do not provide SSNs or for whom wage records are not available in order to
include them in the calculation of levels of performance for each of the core programs.

Circumstances for Collecting Employment-Related Data Using Supplemental Methods for
Performance Reporting Purposes.

For purposes of the employment-related performance indicators, a participant’s status in
unsubsidized employment, quarterly earnings, and employer may be determined by a variety of
data sources. To the extent it is consistent with State law, direct Unemployment Insurance (UI)

6 See 81 FR at 55838.
7 Although the definition of “participant” is consistent across the core programs, there are some slight differences to
account for programmatic requirements. For the WIOA title I Adult, title I Dislocated Worker, title II AEFLA, and
title III Wagner-Peyser Act ES programs, a participant is a reportable individual who has received services other
than the services described in 20 CFR 677.150(a)(3), 34 CFR 463.150(a)(3), and 34 CFR 361.150(a)(3), after
satisfying all applicable programmatic requirements for the provision of services, such as eligibility determination.
For the title I Youth program, a participant is a reportable individual who has satisfied all applicable program
requirements for the provision of services, including eligibility determination, an objective assessment, and
development of an individual service strategy, and received one or more of the 14 WIOA Youth program elements
identified in sec. 129(c)(2) of WIOA. For the VR program, a participant is a reportable individual who has applied
and been determined eligible for VR services, has an approved and signed Individualized Plan for Employment, and
has begun to receive services. See 20 CFR 677.150(a); 34 CFR 463.150(a); 34 CFR 361.150(a); and OCTAE
Program Memorandum 17-2; DOL TEGL 10-16; and RSA TAC 17-01 issued December 19, 2016.

4

---
Page 5

wage match, obtained through either State UI data or the out-of-State wage record data
exchange, via appropriate agreement,8 will be the primary data source for verifying participant
outcomes for purposes of calculating levels of performance for the employment-related
indicators and will be used when available. UI wage records include private sector and
government employer wage reports, such as:

 State government employment records;
 Local government employment records;
 Judicial employment records; and
 Public school employment records.

While most forms of employment in a State’s workforce will be reported via employer tax filings
in the UI wage records system as noted above, certain types of employers and employees are

excluded from coverage under Federal and State UI laws. Certain categories of employment,
such as entrepreneurial employment, Federal employment, employment with the U.S. Postal
Service and the military, and farmwork, are not reflected in State UI wage record databases. For
program participants engaged in these types of employment, and for participants for whom the
State does not have an SSN on record, States may use supplemental wage information and wage
data from other reliable sources to collect employment-related data necessary for calculating
levels of performance.

States that are signatories to the State Wage Interchange System (SWIS) can access other states’
UI wage records through the SWIS. States may use the SWIS to obtain UI wage records to carry
out performance reporting for the six WIOA core programs.

Individuals for whom a quarterly wage record match would not be available through the State UI
data system include but are not limited to:

 Federal employees;
 Military employees; or

 Individuals who are self-employed.

Sources of supplemental wage information for the types of employees described above include:

 Federal employment records, such as military employment records, or records from the
U.S. Department of Defense, U.S. Postal Service, and U.S. Office of Personnel
Management;
 State New Hires Registry;
 State Department of Revenue or Taxation;
 Railroad Retirement System; and
 Other forms of supplemental wage information (see description in the next section).

8 The State Wage Interchange System (SWIS) is a data sharing agreement used, among other things, to exchange
wage record information for performance reporting purposes between States that are party to the data sharing
agreement. Section 116(i)(2) of WIOA continues the requirement that States use wage records to assess performance
and the Secretary of Labor’s authority to facilitate the exchange of wage data across States. Additionally, section 116
of WIOA identifies core programs administered by the Departments and their performance accountability
responsibilities, which include the use of UI wage records for performance accountability purposes.

5

---
Page 6

It is important for States to consider the following when deciding to voluntarily collect
supplemental information for purposes of calculating levels of performance for the employment-
related indicators:

States are required to report a participant’s status in unsubsidized employment during the
second quarter and fourth quarter after exit. In addition, a participant’s quarterly earnings
may only be reported for calculation of median earnings during the second quarter after
exit, upon direct wage record match or collection of supplemental wage information.
While median earnings are not reported for the fourth quarter after exit, either a direct
wage record match or supplemental wage information is required to determine a
participant’s employment status in the fourth quarter after exit.
Within each quarter after exit for which wages are required pursuant to the performance

accountability indicators, if a direct wage match is used to determine both employment
status and wages for the period, then the same direct wage match record must be used for
both wages and employment status. Likewise, if supplemental wage information is used
to determine both employment status and wages within the same reporting period, then
the same supplemental wage information must be used for both wages and employment
status. There is no requirement that the same direct wage record match or supplemental
wage information be used across multiple reporting periods, particularly in the event that
the individual’s employment status changes making the employment and wage
verification method initially used not practicable or ideal. The Departments recommend
that States use direct wage record matches whenever possible because such method yields
the most reliable data.
When calculating levels of performance, States that elect not to use supplemental wage
information are still expected to include participants who do not have the necessary data
to complete a wage record match in the denominator. In so doing, those individuals
would be counted as negatives (0 in the numerator) when calculating levels of
performance for the second and fourth quarter employment status indicators. Participants

will be excluded from the median earnings indicator calculation if the employment rate
second quarter after exit is a negative (0).
For States that elect to use supplemental wage information, States must ensure that a
participant’s quarterly earnings used for reporting the median earnings indicator (second
quarter after exit) only reflect those wages that are actually paid to the participant during
the quarter.
When determining if a participant was employed by the same employer in the second and
fourth quarters after exit, as required by the Effectiveness in Serving Employers measure,
as defined in the Joint Final Rule, the use of a primary data source for verifying a FEIN
match is preferable. If the supplemental wage information obtained does not contain a
FEIN, States should establish other details that confirm the employer as the same, thereby
satisfying the requirements of the performance indicator as defined by the Joint Final
Rule.

6

---
Page 7

Supplemental Wage Information Methods and Procedures

For States that determine the need to collect supplemental wage information for the employment-
related indicators, acceptable forms of supplemental wage information, relevant to the core
program, include, but are not limited to, the following:

Tax documents, payroll records, and employer records such as:

 Copies of quarterly tax payment forms to the Internal Revenue Service, such as a Form
941 (Employer’s Quarterly Tax Return);
 Copies of pay stubs (minimum of two pay stubs); or
 Signed letter or other information from employer on company letterhead attesting to an
individual’s employment status and earnings.

Other supplemental wage records:

 Post-Exit follow-up for the purposes of collecting employment and wage information
(self-reported) from program participants;
 Detailed program staff case notes with employment and wage information obtained from
the employer;
 Automated database systems or data matching with other partners with whom data
sharing agreements exist; or
 Self-employment worksheets signed and attested to by program participants.9

The Departments recommend the following procedures when a State determines the need to
collect supplemental wage information:

Time Period for Collecting Supplemental Wage Information

As described above, for purposes of calculating levels of performance for the employment rate
and effectiveness in serving employers indicators, States must collect data on participants’
employment status (including employer) during the second and fourth quarters after the
participant exits the program10 and, for purposes of calculating levels of performance for the
median earnings indicator, States must collect data on participants’ wages during the second
quarter after exit from the program. Follow-up to collect supplemental wage information may be
conducted by the State, local programs, or a third-party contractor. The timing for collecting
supplemental wage information may vary based on whether the agency knows or expects that UI
wage data will not be available for a participant following the exit from a program.

The need for supplemental wage information for some individuals may not become apparent
until no match is found in direct UI wage records, or in Federal or military employment records,

9 Earnings (or net profit) can be calculated by subtracting total expenses from gross receipts. Not all self-employed
individuals receive a salary, but the funds that represent income over expenses that are available to be invested back
into the business are considered earnings.
10 For the purpose of the employment portion of the credential rate indicator, States must collect data on
participants’ employment status each quarter after exit within one year after exiting the program. (See Table 1:
Timeline for Commencing Data Collection for Employment-Related Performance Indicators).

7

---
Page 8

all of which become available on a time-lagged basis. UI wage data for the employment rate and
the median earnings indicators during the second quarter will not become available until the
latter part of the third quarter after exit, and UI wage data for the education or employment rate
during the fourth quarter after exit will not become available until the latter part of the fifth
quarter after exit.

However, when the agency knows or predicts that UI wage data will not be available for
individuals (such as those participants who did not provide an SSN, or for participants not
covered by UI wage data, such as those who received entrepreneurial or self-employment
training), States do not need to wait two quarters after the close of the second and fourth full
quarters after exit to formally document that UI wage data are not available and begin collection
of supplemental wage information. The optimal time to collect supplemental wage information is
as soon as possible following the close of the second and fourth full quarters after exit. In

general, the Departments recommend the programs remind participants, before program exit, that
they or their employers may be contacted to obtain confirmation of employment status and
earnings, and to explain the expected timeframe for those follow-up contacts. While this
reminder is applicable to all participants, it is especially important for those participants for
whom UI wage data are not available.

Table 1, below, summarizes the times when data match or supplemental wage data are to be
collected.

Table 1: Timeline for Commencing Data Collection for Employment-Related Performance
Indicators

Performance Indicator a UI Wage Data Becomes Available Collection of Supplemental Wage
Information May Begin b
Employment Rate –
Second Quarter after During third or fourth quarter after
Beginning third quarter after exit
Exit exit
(including Title I Youth)
Employment Rate –
During fifth or sixth quarter after exit
Fourth Quarter after
(first or second quarter, next program Beginning fifth quarter after exit
Exit
year)
(including Title I Youth)
Median Earnings –
During third or fourth quarter after
Second Quarter after Beginning third quarter after exit
exit
Exit
Credential Attainment – During second or third quarter after
Beginning second quarter after exit
within 1 Year after Exit exit
Second quarter (Q2) employer
information - During third or fourth
Q2 employer information -
quarter after exit
Effectiveness in Serving Beginning third quarter after exit
Fourth quarter (Q4) employer
Employers Q4 employer information -
information - During fifth or sixth
Beginning fifth quarter after exit
quarter after exit (first or second
quarter, next program year)
8

Performance Indicator a UI Wage Data Becomes Available Collection of Supplemental Wage
Information May Begin b
| Employment Rate –
Second Quarter after
Exit
(including Title I Youth) | During third or fourth quarter after
exit | Beginning third quarter after exit | | |
| Employment Rate –
Fourth Quarter after
Exit
(including Title I Youth) | During fifth or sixth quarter after exit
(first or second quarter, next program
year) | Beginning fifth quarter after exit | | |
| Median Earnings –
Second Quarter after
Exit | During third or fourth quarter after
exit | Beginning third quarter after exit | | |
| Credential Attainment –
within 1 Year after Exit | During second or third quarter after
exit | Beginning second quarter after exit | | |
| Effectiveness in Serving
Employers | Second quarter (Q2) employer
information - During third or fourth
quarter after exit
Fourth quarter (Q4) employer
information - During fifth or sixth
quarter after exit (first or second
quarter, next program year) | Q2 employer information -
Beginning third quarter after exit
Q4 employer information -
Beginning fifth quarter after exit | | |

---
Page 9

a For all performance indicators, exit is the point after which a participant who has received services through any
program meets the criteria for exit from that program or meets the criteria for exit under an applicable common exit
policy (20 CFR 677.150(c), 34 CFR 463.150(c), and 34 CFR 361.150(c)).
b For individuals for whom the agency knows or predicts UI wage data will not be available (such as those
participants who do not provide an SSN, or for participants receiving entrepreneurial or self-employment training),
States should begin collecting supplemental wage information as close to the reference period as possible.
Participants who provide an SSN and have exited a program, but for whom information is not yet
available, are not included in performance calculations until the quarter when such data is
expected to subsequently become available. The Departments expect that UI employer tax record
data for these indicators will generally be available, since there is a two-quarter lag built into the
reporting periods to allow time for reporting participant exit and direct UI wage record match,
and for obtaining supplemental wage information if a direct UI wage record match, or Federal or
military employment record, is not yet available.11 In order to ensure data are available and

reported consistently for all participants, UI data should be reported four quarters after exit for
second quarter wage and employment information, and six quarters after exit for fourth quarter
information. This allows for a one-quarter lag in the reporting of UI wages by employers and an
additional one-quarter lag for reporting by the core programs.

Example: If a participant exits the program between July 1, 2024, and September 30, 2024 (first
quarter of program year (PY) 2024), the participant will not be included in the Employment Rate
– Second Quarter After Exit until the quarterly report for the quarter ending September 30, 2025
(first quarter of PY 2025) and the annual report for PY 2025 for the period ending June 30, 2026.

Jointly administered WIOA regulations require all core programs except for the AEFLA program
(i.e., the Adult, Dislocated Worker, Youth, Wagner-Peyser Act ES, and VR programs) to report
quarterly wage data (20 CFR 677.235(a), 34 CFR 463.235(a), and 34 CFR 361.235(a)). Pursuant
to OMB Control Number 1830-0027, States must report aggregate AEFLA data on an annual
basis. To ensure data are collected to satisfy required reporting timelines, particularly for those
programs reporting on a quarterly basis, States may decide to conduct supplemental wage

information follow-up more frequently than quarterly, as more frequent follow-up may be more
convenient or cost efficient. For example, the program could conduct continuous, ongoing, or
monthly follow-up activities. Therefore, the Departments recommend that programs ensure the
time lag to contact participants after they exit the program be as short as possible to ensure
follow-up activities are successful. The longer a program waits to contact participants after they
exit the program, the greater likelihood of a lower response rate which could result in less valid
data. The timeframes when employment-related information must be reported are shown in
Table 2 below:

11 After the two-quarter lag concludes, if the information is still not available, earnings must be converted to $0
permanently and employment status must be reported as not employed. Wages reported as $0 will indicate that the
participant was unemployed in the second quarter after exit, counting as a negative outcome for purposes of
calculating levels of performance for the Employment Rate Second Quarter after Exit indicator and excluding that
participant from the calculations of levels of performance for the Median Earnings Second Quarter after Exit
indicator. Likewise, if neither a wage record match nor supplemental wage information is available following a two-
quarter lag after the end of the fourth quarter following program exit, the participant will be reported as unemployed
in the fourth quarter after exit.

9

---
Page 10

Table 2: Deadlines for Timely Collection of Data for Employment-Related Performance
Indicators

Exit Report Report Report Median Report Report
Quarter Employment Employment Earnings by Credential Effectiveness in
Rate – 2nd Rate – 4th End of: Attainment Serving
Quarter Quarter (Employment) – Employers by
(including Title (including Title within 1 Year End of:
I Youth) by End I Youth) by End after Exit by
of: of: End of:
First Q1, Q3, Q1, Q3, Q3,
Quarter Next Program Next Program Next Program Next Program Next Program
• (Q1) Year (four Year Year Year Year
(July 1 – quarters later) (six quarters (four quarters (six quarters (six quarters later)
September later) later) later)
30)
Second Q2, Q4, Q2, Q4, Q4,
Quarter Next Program Next Program Next Program Next Program Next Program
• (Q2) Year (four Year Year Year Year
(October quarters later) (six quarters (four quarters (six quarters (six quarters later)
1– later) later) later)
December
31)
Third Q3, Q1, Q3, Q1, Q1,
Quarter Next Program Second Program Next Program Second Program Second Program
• (Q3) Year (four Year After Exit Year Year After Exit Year After Exit
(January quarters later) (six quarters (four quarters (six quarters (six quarters later)
1 – March later) later) later)
31)
Fourth Q4, Q2, Q4, Q2, Q2,
Quarter Next Program Second Program Next Program Second Program Second Program
• (Q4) Year (four Year After Exit Year Year After Exit Year After Exit
(April 1 – quarters later) (six quarters (four quarters (six quarters (six quarters later)
June 30) later) later) later)
Method for Identifying Participants Needing Post- Exit Supplemental Wage Information
In order to effectively identify individuals with whom the agency will need to collect
supplemental wage information, the State’s, or local area’s, case management database needs to
be capable of identifying participants who should be followed using supplemental methods, i.e.,
all participants for whom direct UI wage record match, Federal, or military employment records
are not or were not yet available for data matching. Programs must also determine the
appropriate information to collect from participants to assist in, and during, follow-up, such as:
(1)participants’ SSN (if available and the participant is willing to provide it) and contact
information; and (2) supplemental wage information related to all of the employment-related
performance indicators. This information needs to be retrievable quarterly or at the time when
States determine supplemental wage information is necessary.
If a program uses supplemental wage information to retrieve data on any of the employment-
related performance indicators, data must be collected on all of these indicators or missing, and

10

| Exit
Quarter | | Report | | | Report | | Report Median
Earnings by
End of: | | Report | | Report
Effectiveness in
Serving
Employers by
End of: |
Employment Employment Credential
Rate – 2nd Rate – 4th Attainment
Quarter Quarter (Employment) –
(including Title (including Title within 1 Year
I Youth) by End I Youth) by End after Exit by
of: of: End of:
| First
Quarter
(Q1)
(July 1 –
September
30) | Q1,
Next Program
Year (four
quarters later) | | | Q3,
Next Program
Year
(six quarters
later) | | | Q1,
Next Program
Year
(four quarters
later) | Q3,
Next Program
Year
(six quarters
later) | | | Q3,
Next Program
Year
(six quarters later) |
| Second
Quarter
(Q2)
(October
1–
December
31) | Q2,
Next Program
Year (four
quarters later) | | | Q4,
Next Program
Year
(six quarters
later) | | | Q2,
Next Program
Year
(four quarters
later) | Q4,
Next Program
Year
(six quarters
later) | | | Q4,
Next Program
Year
(six quarters later) |
| Third
Quarter
(Q3)
(January
1 – March
31) | Q3,
Next Program
Year (four
quarters later) | | | Q1,
Second Program
Year After Exit
(six quarters
later) | | | Q3,
Next Program
Year
(four quarters
later) | Q1,
Second Program
Year After Exit
(six quarters
later) | | | Q1,
Second Program
Year After Exit
(six quarters later) |
| Fourth
Quarter
(Q4)
(April 1 –
June 30) | Q4,
Next Program
Year (four
quarters later) | | | Q2,
Second Program
Year After Exit
(six quarters
later) | | | Q4,
Next Program
Year
(four quarters
later) | Q2,
Second Program
Year After Exit
(six quarters
later) | | | Q2,
Second Program
Year After Exit
(six quarters later) |

Exit
Quarter

Report Median
Earnings by
End of:

Report
Effectiveness in
Serving
Employers by
End of:

---
Page 11

incomplete data points will be counted as a negative when calculating levels of performance for
the indicator(s).

Staff Training on Supplemental Wage Information Collection Activities

When conducting supplemental wage information collection activities, the Departments
recommend that staff follow a uniform set of written procedures to collect data in a valid and
reliable manner. Therefore, staff conducting the supplemental wage information collection
activities should be trained in the implementation of the post-exit procedures, including what to
say to former participants or their employers to encourage their cooperation, ways to encourage
voluntary and truthful disclosure, how to document the information received, and how to respond
to questions related to the supplemental wage information collection process. Staff should be
thoroughly familiar with all procedures before beginning the process.

The Departments recognize that programs and States may consider supplemental wage
information to be a very difficult aspect of data collection, particularly since it is sometimes
difficult to gather in a way that produces valid and reliable results. ). The process includes
determining which individuals should be included in the supplemental wage information
collection; locating the individual, employer or case manager; securing his/her cooperation; and
conducting the data collection procedure. Maintaining contact with, or finding, these former
participants and getting them to cooperate in the supplemental wage information collection
process is critical to its success since the response rate largely determines the validity of the
information. Locating such individuals can be difficult, given the transient nature of some core
program participants. The procedures described below will assist States in collecting valid
supplemental wage information in a timely manner.

The validity of the data collection process depends largely on the acceptable forms of
supplemental wage information received from participants. To help improve this aspect of the
process, it is very important that participants know how they may be contacted later and asked

about their employment outcomes. Therefore, programs should inform participants at program
entry about the supplemental wage information collection process and collect extensive contact
information about them, such as addresses and phone numbers of relatives or others who may
know the participants’ whereabouts over time and employment information, if applicable. In
addition, participants should be encouraged to provide new addresses and phone numbers when
they move, and programs should implement procedures to update this information periodically
while the participant remains enrolled in the program. These procedures can greatly assist in
locating former participants months later when the supplemental wage information may need to
be collected. States should provide local programs with additional guidance to improve the level
of response.

Summary of Supplemental Wage Information Collection Guidelines

Develop a method for identifying participants to contact for post- exit supplemental data.
Best practice tip: Have staff follow a uniform set of written procedures to collect data in a
valid and reliable (i.e., accurate and repeatable) manner.

Ensure that the State has a uniform way to conduct the process.

11

---
Page 12

Conduct the outreach as close to the reference period as possible.
Train staff to conduct the outreach for post exit supplemental data.
Identify local resources available to conduct the process.
Implement procedures to improve the quantity and quality of participant responses.
Best practice tip: Inform participants at program entry about the supplemental wage
information post exit process and collect extensive contact information about them, such
as addresses and phone numbers of relatives or others who may know the participants’
whereabouts over time and employment information, if applicable.
Ensure that the State has a database and procedures for supplemental wage information
reporting.

INQUIRIES:

Michael Quinn, Chief
Data Collection and Analysis Unit
Michael.Quinn@ed.gov

CITATIONS:

Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, Pub. L. 113-128;

WIOA Joint Rule for Unified and Combined State Plans, Performance Accountability, and the
One-Stop System Joint Provisions, 81 Fed. Reg. 55791 (Aug. 19, 2016);

Christopher Pope
Director, State Monitoring and Program Improvement Division,
delegated the authority to perform the functions and
duties of the Commissioner

cc: Council of State Administrators of Vocational Rehabilitation
National Council of State Agencies for the Blind

ATTACHMENT: Additional Considerations when Using Supplemental Wage Information for
the Core Programs.

12

---
Page 13

Attachment I: Additional Considerations when Using Supplemental Wage
Information for the Core Programs

When collecting supplemental wage information for the core programs, the Departments
recommend that States consider the following:

The varying intervals of pay schedules mean that not every quarter reflects 13 weeks’
wages, and the agency may need to make adjustments. The wage conversion chart in
Attachment 3 to OCTAE Program Memorandum 17-2; DOL TEGL No. 10-16, Change
3; and RSA TAC 17-01 provides a conversion tool. It is important to note that when
collecting supplemental wage information for the median earnings indicator, programs
must only report those wages that are actually paid to the participant during the quarter,
not projected amounts based on the wage conversion chart.

Core programs must ensure that information gathered is representative of the
participant’s regular hours and earnings. This information can be acquired in an interview
by program staff with the individual or the employer if the information obtained
addressed the following information:

 Average hours scheduled per week;
 Average hours actually worked per week;
 Wage per hour;
 Availability of paid leave; and
 Start and end dates of employment (or start date and still employed).

Activities related to acquiring supplemental wage and earnings information must conform
to an agency’s policies and procedures. Supplemental information reported to the core
program must be consistent with the core program’s reporting requirements.