tac-12-04

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND
REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20202

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CIRCULAR
RSA-TAC-12-04
DATE: June 11, 2012

ADDRESSEES: STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AGENCIES
STATE REHABILITATION COUNCILS

CLIENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & CONTINUING EDUCATION
CENTERS
AMERICAN INDIAN VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION SERVICES
PROJECTS
CONSUMER ADVOCACY ORGANIZATIONS

SUBJECT: Provision of Vocational Rehabilitation Services to an Individual by More
Than One Agency

PURPOSE: In response to several inquiries and through its monitoring of the
vocational rehabilitation (VR) program, the Rehabilitation Services
Administration (RSA) has provided guidance regarding the delivery of
services by more than one VR agency to an individual simultaneously. In
these instances, RSA has addressed questions concerning the
permissibility of doing so and the reporting of employment outcomes by

the two agencies involved in the provision of services to the same
individual. The guidance contained in this technical assistance circular is
consistent with that previously provided to individual VR agencies and is
intended to facilitate the coordination of service provision by agencies
serving individuals who are blind and visually impaired and those serving
individuals with all other disabilities, as well as among VR agencies from
differing states, to better address the disability- and employment-related
needs of the same individual.

TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE: In general, neither the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended
(Rehabilitation Act), nor its implementing regulations, prohibits VR
agencies from each opening a case and serving the same individual
simultaneously. Consequently, RSA has maintained that it is permissible
for more than one VR agency to provide services to an individual at the
same time, so long as the services provided by each are not duplicated,

---
Page 2

thereby recognizing the benefits to both VR agencies and individuals with
disabilities through the coordinated delivery of services.

Provision of Services by More than One VR Agency in the Same State

Section 101(a)(11) of the Rehabilitation Act requires the VR agency to
coordinate with other state agencies and other components of the
workforce development system in the provision of VR services. The
implementing VR regulations at 34 CFR 361.24(d) make it clear that,
when a state has established a second VR agency to serve individuals who
are blind or visually-impaired, both VR agencies in the state must
coordinate and cooperate to provide more effective services to individuals
with multiple disabilities. In particular, 34 CFR 361.24(d) states:

If there is a separate designated State unit for individuals who are
blind, the two designated State units must establish reciprocal
referral services, use each other's services and facilities to the

extent feasible, jointly plan activities to improve services in the
State for individuals with multiple impairments, including visual
impairments, and otherwise cooperate to provide more effective
services, including, if appropriate, entering into a written
cooperative agreement.

The regulations do not prescribe the extent to which state VR agencies
must coordinate with other agencies in the state, including the VR agency
that serves individuals who are blind if such an agency has been
designated in the state. Instead, the regulations “rely on the state agency
to partner with, and use the facilities and services of, appropriate agencies
and programs that it identifies” (NPRM 65 Fed. Reg. 10620, 10624 (Feb.
28, 2000)). This means that a VR agency may contract with another, as it
would any other vendor, to provide particular services, or multiple VR
agencies could partner with one another to serve an individual, pursuant to
separate IPEs, simultaneously.

Given the requirement that both VR agencies in a state, when two have
been designated, must partner with each other to improve the provision of
VR services to individuals with multiple disabilities, RSA strongly
encourages VR agencies in the same state to coordinate when
simultaneously serving individuals with disabilities. In doing so, agencies
can take advantage of the expertise and knowledge of each other to ensure
that individuals with multiple disabilities receive the most efficient and
effective services. For example, agencies serving individuals who are
blind possess the unique knowledge and expertise necessary to provide the
appropriate services to these individuals, either directly or through other
providers. However, personnel of these agencies often do not possess the
specific understanding and skills to best serve individuals who are blind
and who experience secondary physical or mental impairments. This

---
Page 3

expertise can be found among the staff of the VR agency in the state
designated to serve individuals with other disabilities. Together the VR
agencies can best counsel individuals with multiple disabilities regarding
the barriers to employment resulting from each type of impairment,
develop separate yet coordinated individualized plans for employment
• (IPE) identifying the services that address the barriers most effectively,
and provide these services directly or through vendors with which they
have established relationships.

Based on the language and intent of the regulations cited above to promote
the efficient and effective delivery of services to individuals with multiple
disabilities, RSA discourages VR agencies serving individuals who are
blind and those serving individuals with other disabilities in the same state

from enacting policies or entering into agreements that would inhibit the
provision of services by each agency to the same individual
simultaneously. Rather, the two agencies should include in the
cooperative agreement required by 34 CFR 361.24(d) a description of the
manner in which the agencies will jointly provide the array of services at
their disposal to better assist individuals with multiple disabilities to
achieve employment outcomes.

Provision of Services by More than One Agency in Differing States

RSA also strongly encourages collaboration between VR agencies in
differing states when simultaneously providing VR services in their
respective geographic areas to an individual. For example, the need for
such collaboration can arise when an individual receives financial
assistance from the VR agency in the state where he or she resides to
attend a postsecondary education institution in another state. While
attending the college or university, the individual may require other
services, including, but not limited to, orientation and mobility training,
assistive technology devices and training in their use, reader or interpreter
services, and personal assistance services. In cases where such additional
services are necessary, the VR agency located in the state where the

individual is attending college is often in closest proximity to the
individual and possesses the knowledge of the sources available in the
state to provide such services. Thus, it is this agency that is in the best
position to deliver the effective and timely services that will enhance the
individual’s educational experience, better enabling him or her to achieve
an employment outcome.

It is important to reiterate here that a VR agency may not impose a
duration of residency requirement with respect to the eligibility of any
individual who is present in the state (Section 101(a)(12) of the
Rehabilitation Act; 34 CFR 361.42(c)(1)). In addition, a VR agency may
not establish policies that prohibit the provision of out-of-state services to
eligible individuals (34 CFR 361.50(b)(2)). In light of these regulations,

---
Page 4

RSA encourages collaboration and cooperation between VR agencies
when serving individuals whose disability and employment needs are
more effectively and efficiently addressed in more than one state. Though
not required, VR agencies that find this to be the case in more than a few
instances should consider developing cooperative agreements describing
the manner in which this form of collaboration would occur, just as
recommended for agencies serving individuals with multiple disabilities in
states where more than one VR agency has been designated.

Furthermore, when an individual receives services from more than one VR
agency, either in the same or differing states, the services must be
provided in a manner consistent with the administration of the VR
program described in the State Plan for each agency, including any

policies and procedures governing the implementation of an order of
selection or requiring the financial participation of the individual in the
cost of services. Finally, RSA notes that VR agencies sometimes discover
that an individual is receiving services from another agency in the same or
differing state only after determining the individual eligible for services
and/or beginning service provision. Under such circumstances, the VR
agency should collaborate with the second agency to ensure that the
individual is effectively and efficiently served and that services are not
duplicated.

Reporting of Employment Outcomes

VR agencies can provide substantial services to eligible individuals with
disabilities to enable them to achieve employment only after developing
an IPE identifying the specific employment goal, the services necessary
for the achievement of the goal and the providers of the services (Section
102(b) of the Rehabilitation Act; 34 CFR 361.45). In instances where the
same individual is receiving services under IPEs developed with more
than one agency as described above, each agency should report to RSA,
through the VR Program Case Services Report (Form RSA-911), the
employment outcome achieved or other reasons for case closure, once it

has completed the provision of services and the individual has exited from
the program. However, if a VR agency contracts with another VR agency,
whether in the same state or in a different state, to provide specific VR
services to an individual pursuant to an IPE, only the VR agency that
developed the IPE should report the case closure on its RSA-911 when the
individual exits the program.

SUMMARY: The Rehabilitation Act and its implementing VR regulations require VR
agencies to collaborate with one another when serving individuals with
multiple disabilities in the same state, as well as when those whose needs
are best met through the provision of services in more than one state.
RSA strongly encourages that this collaboration permit the provision of
services to individuals simultaneously through the development and

---
Page 5

implementation of separate yet coordinated IPEs to ensure that services
are not duplicated. VR agencies should develop cooperative agreements
describing the circumstances under which this collaboration will occur.
Finally, each VR agency that develops an IPE for the provision of services
to the same individual should report through the RSA-911 the employment
outcome achieved or other reasons for case closure once it has completed
the provision of services and the individual has exited from the VR
program. This form of collaboration is intended to enhance the effective
and efficient delivery of services that will best enable the individual to
achieve an employment outcome.

CITATIONS: Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, Sections 101(a)(11) and (12) and
102(b)

Vocational Rehabilitation Program Regulations found at 34 CFR
361.24(d), 361.42(c)(1), 361.45 and 361.50(b)(2)

INQUIRIES: Carol Dobak, Chief, Vocational Rehabilitation Program Unit
• (202) 245-7325
Carol.Dobak@ed.gov

/s/
Edward Anthony, Ph.D.
Deputy Commissioner

cc: Council of State Administrators of Vocational Rehabilitation
National Council of State Agencies for the Blind

Consortia of Administrators of Native American Rehabilitation
National Disability Rights Network