tac-98-01

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
OFFICE OF SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES
REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON, DC 20202

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CIRCULAR
RSA-TAC-98-01
DATE: November 3, 1997

ADDRESSEES: STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AGENCIES (GENERAL)
STATE VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AGENCIES (BLIND)

STATE REHABILITATION ADVISORY COUNCILS
CLIENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS
REGIONAL REHABILITATION CONTINUING EDUCATION
PROGRAMS
RSA SENIOR MANAGEMENT TEAM

SUBJECT: Support Services for Individuals With Cognitive Disabilities and Others
Who Need Assistance in Implementing Informed Choice

CITATIONS: Section 12(e)(2)(F) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended. 34
CFR 361.52.

CONTENT: Final program regulations at 34 CFR 361.52 require each state VR agency,
in consultation with its State Rehabilitation Advisory Council, to develop
and implement written policies and procedures enabling each individual to
make an informed choice with regard to selection of a vocational goal,

objectives, services, and service providers. These policies and procedures
must ensure that each individual receives information concerning the
availability of support services for individuals with cognitive or other
disabilities who require assistance in exercising informed choice.

This guidance, much of which is derived from the RSA Choice
Demonstration Projects, is designed to assist State VR agency staff in
understanding the needs of individuals with cognitive disabilities for
support and assistance in exercising informed choice and in identifying
methods for addressing those needs. Although specifically helpful for
working with individuals with cognitive disabilities, use of these methods
should allow all individuals to increase their participation in the VR
process to the extent that they are able to do so.

1

---
Page 2

STRATEGIES FOR SUPPORTING IMPLEMENTATION OF
INFORMED CHOICE

Informed choice is the process by which individuals participating in the
VR program make decisions about their vocational goals, the services and
service providers that are necessary to reach those goals, and how those
services will be procured. The decision-making process takes into account
the individual's values and characteristics, the availability of resources and
alternatives, and general economic conditions. Implementing informed
choice requires communicating clearly, gathering and understanding
information, setting goals, making decisions, and following through with
decisions. To the extent that the individual participates in the procurement
of services, implementing choice may also involve basic consumer skills,

such as money management and negotiating in the market place.

Mental retardation, learning disabilities, head injury, and stroke typically
result in cognitive impairments that can affect an individual's ability to
gather and analyze information, develop and follow through with plans,
and decide among various options. Individuals with mental illnesses may
have cognitive impairments as a result of the illness or of medications.
Organic brain damage associated with conditions such as multiple
sclerosis, lupus, and HIV-Aids may result in short term memory loss and
other cognitive impairments. Depending upon the nature of the disability
and the medications an individual is taking, an individual's ability to do
cognitive tasks may fluctuate dramatically from day to day.

Other individuals may also require assistance in exercising informed
choice. These include individuals with any type of disability who have
not had experience in making decisions for themselves and individuals

with severe impairments in communication skills as a result of physical or
sensory disabilities.

In general, individuals with cognitive impairments who are eligible for VR
services can comprehend information and ideas and make individual
judgements if they are provided with appropriate support and assistance.
The individual, the VR counselor, and others who are working with the
individual need to determine the level of the individual's skills and
abilities in these areas. Once the skills and abilities have been identified, a
number of strategies can be used to improve the individual's skills and to
provide information and assistance with decision-making at the
individual's level.

2

---
Page 3

The following discussion describes methods for determining the
individual's abilities to exercise choice and for implementing strategies to
provide assistance and support, including:

• • improving the skills needed by the individual to exercise choice;
• • providing support and assistance through other individuals;
• • simplifying information; and
• • using multiple modes of communication and repetition.

Determining the individual's skill and ability to implement informed
choice.

Methods to determine the individual's ability to implement informed
choice may vary depending upon the individual's disability and the
severity of that disability. For some individuals, both the counselor, the
individual, and others can use a checklist to analyze the individual's skills
and abilities in areas important to the implementation of informed choice.
Such an analysis provides a way for the individual and others working
with him or her to identify those tasks the individual can do
independently; those tasks for which the individual needs support,
accommodations, and skill building; and those that someone else will need
to do. Purchased checklists and inventories about decision-making and
goal setting skills can be used or agencies can develop such assessments.
(VT)

Checklists and inventories are based on comparing an individual's known
performance in decision-making against a standard. Those who lack
experience in making decisions and those who have difficulty
communicating about their past experiences are not easily assessed by
such methods. For these individuals, other techniques of discovery are
needed to gather the same information.

For example, working with an individual on developing a vocational
profile and employment goals will simultaneously yield information about
how the person gathers and responds to information and makes decisions.
• (UCPA) Situational assessments or trial work experiences provide the
opportunity to observe the individual in natural life situations that help
clarify not only the individual's goal and service needs, but also provide
insight and information about how the individual makes decisions.
Interviewing family, friends, and others who are close to the individual
may also yield the same information. Such approaches are also especially

helpful for individuals who are not able to communicate clearly and
assertively. Scheduling a longer time period for meetings with individuals
who have difficulty focusing on the issues to be discussed helps assure
that the individual's thoughts get expressed. The success of these types of
discovery depends upon the ability of the VR counselor and others to

3

---
Page 4

listen to and observe the individual carefully over time. If the time
required for such observation and interaction is more than is feasible for a
VR counselor, VR agencies can consider paying someone other than the
counselor to work on this task.

Counselor judgement and observation are a primary source of discovery
throughout the VR process. How the individual followed the process of
obtaining VR services and how he or she processes information and
responds to questions during interview and intake provides information
about some of the skills related to informed choice. Probing for the
reasons that an individual says "no" to a particular option helps to
determine if the individual is responding because of lack of information or
because of fear. Assessing changes in the individual's skill in

implementing informed choice and adapting supports appropriately is a
continuous evaluative and educational role for the counselor.

Counselors may also find RSA Program Assistance Circular (PAC) 90-
7: Guidelines for Determining Whether a Person With Specific
Learning Disabilities Has a Severe Handicap for Vocational
Rehabilitation Program Purposes, issued September 28, 1990, helpful.
The guidance for evaluating an individual's capacities in the areas of self-
direction and communication can be applied to evaluating the individual's
capacities for implementing informed choice. The concepts are applicable
to other types of disabilities.

Self-discovery is also an important factor in the implementation of
informed choice. Employment outcome as defined in the final regulations
for the VR program (34 CFR 361.5(b)(15)) includes the element that the
employment outcome "is consistent with an individual's strengths,

resources, priorities, concerns, abilities, capabilities, interests, and
informed choice." The more complex the individual's situation or
disability, the more difficult it is for others to help the person consider all
the factors necessary for making informed decisions. Using techniques
that teach individuals to develop an awareness of how their disability
affects them, how they function on a daily basis, and how they respond to
information and make decisions may be a better investment of the time
and efforts of rehabilitation personnel.

One method of self-discovery is for the individual to keep a
diary/log/journal, either in writing or by audio tape. (TDTI) Individuals
can record information such as variations in their energy level, times and
conditions when they feel good and are doing their best work, variations in
symptoms, and other revelations about the VR process. The log becomes
a self-management tool, providing insight into behavior patterns and
forming the basis for strategies to maximize the individual's functioning

level.

4

---
Page 5

Improving the skills needed by the individual to implement informed
choice

The ability to make choices grows with experience in decision making.
VR agencies can purchase or provide an array of services that help
individuals to move further along the continuum of independently making
decisions and taking personal responsibility for those decisions.
Consumer empowerment training, training and experience in goal setting
and decision making skills, and self-assessment techniques are services
that can improve the skills and abilities needed to implement informed
choice. In addition to training, the VR counselor and others working with
the individual can provide structure to help the individual determine what

information is needed, ways to gather that information, what options are
available, and ways to decide among those options.

Assisting the individual to gather information can begin during the
assessment process by shifting from a process in which an evaluator talks
to the VR counselor about the individual to a process that includes the
individual in the discussions or allows the individual to direct the
discussions. A method common to the choice projects is to facilitate the
relationship between the evaluator and the individual. Reports are
provided to the individual and must be written so the individual can
understand the information. The individual can clarify and discuss the
information with the provider, the counselor, a peer group, a rehabilitation
team, family members, or others. The goal is for the VR participant to be
able to explain what the information means, how it affects that individual's
life, and what he or she wants to do as a result.

Individuals can also be taught to gather information about goods, services,
and service providers. To provide structure for gathering such
information, the VR counselor and participant can develop a list of
questions to ask providers. For example, an individual who is seeking the
services of a job developer might want to ask if the job developer
specializes in certain types of jobs, how the developer gets job leads, how
much time the developer will spend per week working with the individual,
and what the developer is expecting from the individual. (SWBIRA) VR
agencies can support this method by developing a list of core questions to
be supplemented by specific individualized questions as appropriate and
by reimbursing the individual for any telephone or travel expenses
incurred while gathering information.

To provide experience in planning and decision making, these processes
can be broken down into small steps. A series of short-term vocationally-
related activities and experiences provides the individual with experience

in implementing the choice process and gives the counselor opportunities

5

---
Page 6

to observe the individual's growth in planning and decision-making skills.
As these skills grow, both the individual and the counselor develop more
confidence in the individual's ability to make decisions. The counselor
learns how the person works best and what accommodations are needed to
facilitate that person's decision-making.

To increase the participation of those who are reluctant to make decisions,
the counselor can ask the individual what he or she wants the counselor to
do. Another method is for the counselor to state what he or she is willing
to do and then ask the individual what they are willing to do. Both
methods invite the individual to begin to make decisions, exercise control,
and take responsibility.

Getting support and assistance from others

Individuals close to the person can provide support and assistance in
implementing informed choice. For orientation and other important
meetings, the individual could bring a family member to help with
understanding the information, remembering the next steps in the process,
and asking questions. In some cultures, individuals naturally rely heavily
on the support of their families throughout the decision-making process.

This strategy works best when the family is a neutral party. When the
family is not neutral or not available, consumer connectors, mentors,
advocates, a buddy system, and peer support groups can be used. One
project used a mentor paid by the project who served as a job coach,
moved with the individual through a series of short-term work
experiences, and provided continuity of feedback to the individual, family,
and others working with the individual. The mentor was recruited through

a local literacy council. (AR) A peer group of individuals with disabilities
may have extensive experiential knowledge that, when shared, becomes a
resource for others to use in gathering and analyzing information and
making decisions. Individuals with disabilities have an understanding
about how they learned to do certain processes and may be able to provide
information in a way that another individual with a disability is more
likely to understand.

The VR counselor also plays a key supportive role by following up with
the individual frequently to see how they are doing and by modifying or
developing strategies to help the person improve their planning and
decision-making skills.

Simplifying information

Access to appropriate information allows an individual to identify

opportunities and solutions to problems, assess strengths and weaknesses,

6

---
Page 7

ask appropriate questions, locate resources, and, if necessary, advocate
effectively. Access to appropriate information allows an individual to
influence, and to be influenced by, the vocational rehabilitation planning
process. For individuals with cognitive impairments, access to the
information necessary for implementing informed choice can be achieved
by breaking information down, taking more time for information
gathering, using simpler language, symbols, and tangible methods of
conveying information, and providing supports and accommodations.

Written program materials can be simplified by incorporating one thought
per sentence, avoiding professional language and terminology, and
supplementing text with pictures and graphics. To simplify verbal
discussions, break information down into small components, explain more

clearly, ask the person to repeat what has been said, note important points
stated by the consumer, and review these at the end of each session.

Information and alternatives can be made more tangible by a series of
short-term volunteer placements that provides experiential knowledge
about working in different types of situations. Other rehabilitation
objectives, such as learning to travel and developing social skills, may also
be achieved during such experiences.

Pictures and graphics, substituted for written materials, also provide
tangible ways to gather and exchange information. A picture checklist of
factors that the individual is looking for in a job enables the person to
remember all the factors and to check off the appropriate factors when
visiting any potential job site. Involvement of the individual in selecting
the pictures from graphics available on the computer assures that the
person understands what the pictures symbolize. Comparing the

checklists from various sites provides a more tangible way of selecting
among options. (WA)

Some individuals will benefit from use of accommodations for receiving,
organizing, and retrieving information. (BCIL) A quick assessment of
whether an individual may need accommodations for reading can be
obtained by observing how they respond to the application form. In
addition, the VR counselor can ask whether the individual needs
accommodations, such as someone to help with reading and writing. If so,
the individual can bring someone to help with those tasks or the program
can provide a reader. The counselor can provide, or help the individual
acquire, tools for organizing and retrieving information, such as a
calendar, an organizer, and business card slot holders. For individuals
with deficits in attention, working in a distraction-free space or using
familiar surroundings may enable the individual to better attend to the
information being presented.

7

---
Page 8

Using multiple modes of communication and repetition

The implementing regulations at 34 CFR 361.52(a) require state VR
agencies to ensure that individuals receive information about choice in
appropriate modes of communication. Appropriate modes of
communication, as defined at 34 CFR 361.5(b)(5), means specialized aids
and supports that enable an individual with a disability to comprehend and
respond to information that is being communicated. The definition
provides examples of appropriate modes that include but are not limited to
graphic presentations and simple language materials discussed previously
in this document. For individuals with cognitive impairments,
comprehension and retention of information is enhanced when information
is provided in multiple modes of communication and repeated over time.

Audio taping information allows the individual to listen to it multiple
times. Family members can help repeat information, such as a fact sheet,
by reviewing it at home multiple times. Making information available in
auditory, visual, and experiential modes provides the individual with
multiple options for acquiring information and assures repetition. Group
discussions among peers or rehabilitation teams helps with understanding.
Over time, group members will discuss the same issue in many different
ways, thus providing the opportunity for multiple presentations and
different opportunities to achieve understanding. Information resource
centers allow individuals to drop in and repeatedly review information and
to discuss information with other individuals using those same resources.
Documenting, in writing or other media, what needs to be done and then
documenting what was done is helpful for individuals with short-term
memory loss. A series of experiences arranged as part of the
comprehensive assessment or as short-term objectives on the

individualized written rehabilitation program (IWRP) provide experiential
and repetitive methods of acquiring information. Use of multiple modes
and repetition, especially over a period of time, also provides
accommodations for individuals with cognitive impairments whose ability
to perform cognitive tasks varies significantly from day to day.

Both the individual and the counselor have a role in discovering the
modalities in which the individual achieves the best understanding and in
assisting the individual to acquire information in those modalities. The
role of the VR agency is to provide opportunities for information to be
presented in various modalities.

SUMMARY

There are many methods that State VR agencies can use to provide
support services for individuals with cognitive and other disabilities who

require assistance in exercising informed choice. A number of the

8

---
Page 9

methods discussed above provide support for a variety of needs. Within
the discussion, selected specific strategies are accompanied by acronyms
for the Choice Demonstration Projects. More information on these
specific strategies can be obtained by contacting the projects listed below.

In many instances, use of the methods described above will require
spending more time with the individual and allowing for a trial and error
approach to planning, gathering information, and making decisions.
Agencies have the option of deciding whether the counselor will spend
that time or whether they will pay for someone else to provide that service.
Often, the time used for such approaches can occur simultaneously with
the provision of other rehabilitation services that are directed toward
achieving an employment outcome. The individual's skills in exercising

informed choice can grow in a parallel fashion along with growth in
specific vocational and employment skills.

Both the VR counselor and the individual have responsibilities in
determining the individual's skills for exercising informed choice,
deciding on methods for improving those skills, and developing needed
accommodations and supports. The counselor and the individual can also
enlist the aid of others, either paid or voluntary, to help in these efforts.

INQUIRIES: Choice Demonstration Projects:

Arkansas Rehabilitation Services (AR)
Nancy Sullivan/Sterling Hughes
501-661-9407/501-534-1372

Berkeley Center for Independent Living (BCIL)

Terry Herkimer 510-841-4776

Southwest Business, Industry, and Rehabilitation Association (SWBIRA)
Lee Lanning 602-275-0180

The Development Team, Inc. (TDTI)
Harry Hall 904-247-4640

United Cerebral Palsy Associations (UCPA)
Michael Callahan 601-497-6999

Vermont Division of Vocational Rehabilitation (VT)
Michael Collins 802-241-2186

Washington Division of Vocational Rehabilitation (WA)
Abby Cooper 206-587-4444

9

---
Page 10

Rehabilitation Services Administration:
RSA Regional Offices
RSA Central Office:
Suzanne Tillman 202-205-8303

/s/
Fredric K. Schroeder, Ph.D.
Commissioner

CC: CSAVR
NAPAS

RSA Regions II, IV, V, VIII, and X

10